TRITIUM GENERATION FROM THE INTERACTION OF
A GLOW DISCHARGE PLASMA WITH METALS AND
WITH A MAGNETIC FIEL

We present results of our research on tritium generation through the bombardment
of the surface of various metals by accelerated ions of hydrogen isotopes from
a glow discharge plasma, with and without a magnetic field. The introduction
of a magnetic field perpendicular to the sample surface results in an increase in
the tritium activity, and in the tritium generation rate, of almost two orders of
magnitude as compared to similar experiments run with no magnetic field. The
largest tritium generation rates observed were obtained with the glow discharge
operating in a magnetic field, and were in the range 109–1010 atom/s. This is
higher than our background by three to four orders of magnitude. The use of
a magnetic field has resulted in good reproducibility, and the development of a
reliable tritium generation rate of about 1010 atom/s for tantalum, tungsten, and
platinum.

A new technique for the generation and measurement of excess heat is presented
based on the transfusion of hydrogen isotopes through the metal wall of a hollow
sample electrode toward the glow discharge. In the case of a vanadium cathode,
the maximum excess thermal power is about 30% of the absorbed power. The
generation of excess power is found to be maximized in the temperature 600–700K
for relative power, and 800–1000K for absolute power. The results ofmeasurements
support a nuclear origin for the tritium generation, as opposed to a conventional
thermal activation explanation.

Mass spectroscopic measurements show an increase in species with deuterium in
discharge experiments with hydrogen gas and with deuterium gas. The tritium
generation rate is found to increase with the addition of deuterium, but by an
amount not commensurate with the amount of deuterium added. Measurements
of the gamma spectrum indicate that positrons are not generated in the course of
tritium generation. These observations allow us to assert that modified versions of
p+p and p+d reactions are responsible for the productionof deuteriumand tritium;
where the reactions in these experiments proceed through electronic catalysis, as
p+e+p and p+e+d. The production of excess heat at the level of 1 kW through this
reactionmechansim (and under these discharge conditions with hydrogen isotopes)
would be associated with a tritium generation rate of about 1012 atom/s.


1. Introduction

We have reported previously1–3 that the interaction of accelerated ions of hydrogen
isotopes from a low-energy (<10 keV) glow discharge plasma with metals can result
in intense tritium generation (up to 109 atom/s, using deuterium gas of technical
cleanliness composed of 95% D2 + 5% H2,volumetric). It was also found that the
use of a natural mix of a hydrogen isotopes (0.015% D2+H2 99.985%), can result
in high rates of tritium production, and a tritium generation rate of 108 atom/s
was measured.4 The reproducibility in the case of similar experiments has not been
suﬃcient for normal scientiﬁc research and unequivocal conclusions, as measured
values of the tritium generation rate could diﬀer from experiment to experiment by
three orders of magnitude due to minor diﬀerences in experimental conditions.

Further studies have shown that the poor reproducibility is connected to the
problem of uncontrollable tritium absorption by some constructional elements of
the working chamber, that could lead to an unpredictable appearance of tritium
resulting in a degradation of the experimental results.5,6 We have now managed to
achieve good reproducibility. This is due to a combination of improvements in tech-
nique that include: the removal of most “tritium-active” constructional elements of
structure of the working chamber, improvements in the technique of gas removal
from internal surfaces of the working chamber and samples, and purges of the work-
ing liquid for the roughing-down pump by ballast gas after each experiment.7 The
reliable reproducibility of experiments, with the absence of uncontrolled tritium
emission from the installation and samples, has allowed us to return to areas of
our basic research interests, which include: studying the interaction for hydrogen
isotopes with metals in the glow discharge, and revisiting experiments with pulsed
current and an external magnetic ﬁeld, which earlier gave the highest tritium gen-
eration rate.8
The purpose of the present work was the study of tritium generation and excess
heat, from the interaction of mixes of hydrogen isotopes with metal surfaces in a
plasma glow discharge, and the eﬀects due to an imposed magnetic ﬁeld.


2. Experimental Approach

One focus of our research has been on the interaction of hydrogen isotopes with
metals includes the acceleration of positive ions in the glow discharge at constant
current at elevated pressure, and the consequences that occur when these ions are
incident on the surface of diﬀerent metals.1,2,8 We brieﬂy describe in this section
the experimental approach we used.


2.1. The discharge facility:

The research was carried out at the UVN-84R-1 facility, a schematic of which is
illustrated in Fig. 1.

In facility is described in detail in Ref.

The facility
includes a turbo-molecular pump (23) for evacuating the chamber (3), in which
is placed a simple hollow cathode (4).

The sample cavity is pumped out by a
N O S
To gas-system.

Figure 1.

The scheme of installation on research of a hydrogen mass-spectrum. 1: Diﬀerential
manometer; 2: 7.9.12.13.14.15.16.19.2; 2: valves; 3: chamber; 4: sample-cathod; 5: anode; 6:
ﬂange; 8: manometer; 10: roughing-down pump; 11: high-vaccum valve; 17: IPDO-2; 18: NORD-
250; 20: TMP-200; 21: nitric trap; 23: TMP-500; 24: mass-spectrometer MX-7304.
diﬀerent turbo-molecular pump (20), and the electrodischarge (18) with a control
for the pumped-out gases of mass-spectrometers MX-7304 and IPDO-2. The sample
consists of a hollow cylinder, sealed on one side and welded to a fastening ﬂange on
the other. The sample thickness in the case of vanadium, molybdenum, niobium,
and titanium is 0.5–4 mm, the outside diameter is 10–20mm, and the length is
20–100 mm.

The pressure of the (plasma-forming) gas is maintained in the range 0.5–

25 × 103 Pa. The sample temperature varied in the range 300–1800K due to the

power supplied by the glow discharge, which was run at voltages in the range 200–

700 V and current densities in the range 50–1000A/m2. The temperature is mea-

sured using thermocouples (TR5/TR20) placed outside of the operative range of
the discharge, and using optical pyrometers (OMP-54), with an error is not higher
than ±10%. The sensitivity of the measurement system on the hydrogen ﬂow was
no worse than 109 atom/s. An (arch-type) magnetic ﬁeld was implemented per-
pendicular to the plane of the cathode as illustrated in Fig. 2 using water-cooled
magnetrons.

The device consists of a water-cooled vacuum chamber (1), in which the mag-
netron system (4) with water cooling (5) and barium ferrite permanent magnet (6)
is placed. The sample-cathode (3) is placed on the magnetron surface and could be
cooled by it. Because of heterogeneity of the distribution of magnetic ﬁeld lines (7)
in space, the magnetic ﬁeld on the sample surface was in the range 0.002–0.02 T.

The magnetic ﬁeld distribution was kept constant during the experiment by using
water cooling. The ring anode (2), placed coaxial with the sample at a distance of
Water
H2,D2, T2 
Figure 2.

The scheme of the device on research of interaction of hydrogen isotopes with metals in
the glow discharge at imposing a magnetic ﬁeld. 1: Vacuum chamber; 2: anode; 3: sample-cathode;
4: tank of magnetrons; 5: cooling water; 6: permanent magnet; 7: magnetic ﬁeld lines.
5–50 mm, was at high voltage. The sample temperature, and distance between the
anode and cathode, could be adjusted. The chamber (1), after the removal of gases
and pump out, could be ﬁlled with a mix of hydrogen isotopes containing of various
ratios, or inert gases. In similar experiments we used ﬂat samples of various metals,
with a diameter of 100 mm and thickness of 0.1–2mm. Rings and cores of corrosion-
proof steel or molybdenum were used for the anode. We used titanium, niobium,
molybdenum, tantalum, and tungsten samples of technical cleanliness, with impu-
rity levels no more than 1% by mass. We used a mix of hydrogen isotopes with a
concentration 1.5 × 10−2% deuterium in ordinary hydrogen; or deuterium gas with
a technical cleanliness of 95% D2 + 5% H2 atomic shares; or a mix of hydrogen
isotopes or helium-4 with the an impurity content of no more than 1% by mass.

The power supply used a rectiﬁer (that was not stabilised) with a ballast resistor,
giving a maximal voltage up to 6 kV and current up to 3 A.


2.2. Background measurements:

Background measurements were done using cylindrical hollow samples of molybde-
num sealed on one end, and attached to water-cooled ﬂanges on the other.4 These
samples have a diameter of 23 mm, a length of 100 mm, and a wall thickness of

1 mm. For such samples we carried out experiments as with thermal activation,

with heating from a tungsten resistive heater, and with the glow discharge using a
natural mix of hydrogen isotopes. In these experiments, it was possible to assess
whether tritium leaked in from elements of the vacuum chamber and equipment.

The thermal activation was not applied to ﬂat samples because of powerful cooling
of samples due to the water-cooled substrate.


2.3. Experimental protocol:

The experiments were carried out as follows: The sample is initially ﬁxed on cooled
magnetrons, then the chamber is pumped out, and then degassed with help of the
resistive heater running at a power up to 10 kW. After the removal of superﬂuous
gases and the cooling of internal parts of the chamber to below 400 K, the chamber
is ﬁlled the desired mix of hydrogen isotopes to operating pressure. High voltage
is applied to the anode, which initiates the glow discharge and establishes neces-
sary current, voltage and temperature conditions at the sample.

The discharge
and experimental parameters are maintained for a certain time (2–50 h), then the
plasma-forming gas is pumped from the chamber by the vacuum pump in into
rubber “pillows” and the discharge is switched oﬀ.

Hydrogen from the “pillows” is mixed with air and burned on a heated spiral in
a cylindrical furnace of a special installation. Water produced from the burning is
frozen in a cooled trap at a temperature of 260–270 K. Then 0.2 ml of the formed
water enters a 5 ml liquid scintillator (ZS-8) and the tritium content is measured at
the BETA-2 facility. The eﬃciency of measurement β-particles in these measure-
ments was 28% using VNIIFTRI standards. The measurement error for tritium
content in these tests did not exceed ±50%.

For background measurements on ﬂat samples with substrate water-cooling and
magnetic ﬁeld we used inert helium for the gas discharge. A philosophy of measure-
ment have kept the former use of the addition of the initial hydrogen in the pillow
with helium completely pumped out from the working volume after termination of
the experiment. For maximal catching of trace tritium the additional hydrogen also
was pumped through working volume. Thus, we could compare the tritium genera-
tion rate for isotopes of hydrogen and helium under conditions with approximately
the same inﬂuence of thermal and radiating eﬀects. The third series of background
measurements consists of the use of ﬂat samples on a cooled substrate in the glow
discharge using a gas of hydrogen isotopes, but without use of an external magnetic
ﬁeld. This series of measurements allowed us to determine the inﬂuence of the mag-
netic ﬁeld on the tritium generation rate, with comparable thermo-desorption and
electro-migration eﬀects.


2.4. Radiation detection:

Measurements of radiation intensity of a gammas with an energy near 510.8keV
were made using a gamma spectrometer station.

We used a high purity planar

5 cm2 germanium detector from Canberra with a portable (notebook) computer, and

GENIE-2000 software. The choice of size ampliﬁcation, as the power calibration has
shown, provided for a measurement of the background gamma energies in a range
of energy from 30 to 2000 keV. The background and possible gamma radiation at
the working installation was measured over 7000 s. The distance from the detector
to the centre of discharge unit is about 120 mm; from the detector to the outside
wall of the chamber is about 20 mm. Between the detector and the possible source
of gamma radiation was a water-cooled wall of the facility, with a wall of thickness
H2,D2 
Figure 3.

The scheme for deﬁnition of the thermal eﬀects in the glow discharge. 1: Basis of a
sample from molybdenum; 2: cup of the sample of hydride-forming metal; 3: anode; 4: ceramic
isolators; 5: thermocouples.


5 mm made of steel (12C18N10T). The measurement eﬃciency was determined using

sources consisting of radioactive solutions of Cs-137 and Ba-133. At 511 keV the
detection eﬃciency was measured to be 0.00013 ± 0.00003.


2.5. Thermal measurements:

The scheme used for measuring thermal eﬀects associated with a cathode sample
in a glow discharge experiment with hydrogen isotopes is shown in Fig. 3. The
system consists of a molybdenum base (1), with a cup welded on it (2) made of a
hydride-forming metal (such as niobium, vanadium or zirconium). Thermocouples
(5) were welded at diﬀerent distances from the sample into the molybdenum base
as shown. The thermocouples (TR5/20) allowed us to determine the thermal ﬂow
from the sample to a water-cooled sink through a material (Mo) with a known
thermal resistance.

The sample was surrounded by the ring anode (3), and by
ceramic cylinders (4) of quartz and zirconium oxides to reduce thermal losses.

The basic philosophy of the thermal measurement can be described as follows.

In the beginning, the working chamber ﬁlled by hydrogen isotopes and a discharge
is ignited between the electrodes, one of which is the sample. In the sample cavity
a vacuum is created using a roughing pump and a turbomolecular pump. Then the
sample temperature becomes elevated, and the glow discharge is operated under
stable discharge parameters for 2–6 h, leading to a constant heat ﬂow that can be
measured. The temperature diﬀerence between the thermocouples in the molybde-
num basis is measured, and the heat ﬂow is calculated from
where λ is the thermal conduction coeﬃcient of molybdenum in the relevant temper-
ature range, where S is the cross sectional area of the molybdenum basis, and where
and dT
dl is the thermal gradient estimated from the temperature measurements.

As excess heat in our experiments is associated with the hydrogen isotopes, sub-
sequent measurements of temperatures on the sample and molybdenum base were
carried out after ﬁlling the internal sample cavity with hydrogen isotopes, keeping
the power of the glow discharge and parameters outside of the sample constant. The
thermal ﬂow from the sample was measured repeatedly using the formula above af-
ter stabilisation of parameters for 2–6 h. Measurements were carried out at sample
temperatures up to 1000 K. The thermal ﬂow from the sample was measured both
with the internal sample cavity under vacuum, and ﬁlled with hydrogen isotopes,
at identical discharge power, allowing for an estimation of the diﬀerence in ther-
mal ﬂow between the two cases. During measurements, we alternately pumped out
the internal sample cavity. The discharge caused a constant ﬂow of hydrogen iso-
topes from the discharge side through the sample wall to the inside, resulting in
further loading hydrogen isotopes into the internal sample cavity up to a pressure
of 6 × 103 Pa.

This measurement philosophy assumes that the background level for excess heat
is deﬁned when the internal sample cavity is under vacuum.

Such an approach
probably overestimates the measured excess heat, as the inﬂuence of heat trans-
mission inside the sample is not taken into account. The absolute error associated
with the thermal ﬂow measurements did not exceed ±50% (relative ±20%). These
measurements allow for only an estimate of the overall thermal balance. As further
research has shown, the (unaccounted) heat loss in our system due to convection
reduces the accuracy for estimations of the complete thermal balance. Given this,
the technique is still useful, since it supposes a only a simple change associated with
the sample; this is an important advantage at this stage of the research.


3. Results

3.1. Results at diﬀerent temperatures:

The basic results from experiments on the inﬂuence of a magnetic ﬁeld on the tri-
tium generation rate are shown in Table 1. One sees that for cylindrical samples
of molybdenum with thermal activation and natural mix of hydrogen isotopes, the
resulting activity associated with the presence of tritium exceeded by about ﬁve
times the activity of the initial hydrogen gas. For these samples, the excess activity
from glow discharge experiments using a natural mix of hydrogen isotopes is seen
to be greater at 1600 K than at 1800 K, Experiments with water-cooled molyb-
denum samples at lower temperature (near 1000 K) in natural hydrogen result in
Table 1.

Tritium generation from the interaction of the glow discharge plasma with metals, with and
without a magnetic ﬁeld.
experimental parameters
no ﬁeld
magnetic ﬁeld
Mo-100, He
temperature (K), I is the current (A), V is voltage (V), t is run time (h), Pc is the cell pressure
(Pa ×103), Ps is the sample temperature (Pa ×103), act. denotes the tritium activity in counts/sec,
and ΓT is the tritium production rate in atoms/sec. Powers of 10 indicated with brackets; 6.1[9] =

6.1 × 109.:
even greater activity, about a factor of 50 higher than the initial gas activity. This
is probably connected to the further reduction of the sample temperature, which
in subsequent experiments did not exceed 1300 K. We note that a the surface con-
centration hydrogen isotopes is increased at the lower temperatures. It is possible
that the increase of activity is also connected to the inﬂuence the electric ﬁeld dis-
tribution, the self-magnetic ﬁeld, and to the interaction of hydrogen isotopes with
the sputtered atoms from the ﬂat metal sample.

The introduction of the magnetic ﬁeld perpendicular to the molybdenum sample
surface with other parameters comparable has resulted in an additional increase of
activity (and the tritium generation rate) of almost another two orders of magnitude.


3.2. Metal surface eﬀects:

The use of inert helium in the (plasma-forming) gas for experiments on ﬂat samples
of molybdenum, with a water-cooled substrate and magnetic ﬁeld, results in values
of tritium activity close to background. A similar value was seen in the case of
tungsten. For materials such as niobium and tantalum, the tritium activity with
inert helium has increased by more than an order of magnitude, in comparison
with molybdenum and tungsten. This could be connected to residual hydrogen, the
quantity of which is greater in hydride-forming metals.

The tritium generation rate for ﬂat samples with a natural mix of hydrogen
isotopes for ﬂat samples in the glow discharge in the absences of a magnetic ﬁeld were
within the range of 2.9 × 107–9.7 × 107 atom/s for the metals tested. This is almost
two orders of magnitude greater than the background rate one would associated with
the initial hydrogen gas activity. For such conditions the tritium generation rate
for molybdenum and tungsten are seen to be somewhat greater than for niobium
Energy (eV)
Coefficient of nuclear interaction
(atom/ion)
Figure 4.

Dependence of the coeﬃcient of nuclear interactions versus an energy of ions for hydro-
gen isotopes in the glow discharge. 1: Dependence for Nb, Mo, Ta and W, received from results
of present works; 2: earlier received dependence for W; 3: earlier received dependence for Mo.3
and tantalum. This may be connected to the interaction of hydrogen isotopes with
the metal surface, since the presence of dissolved hydrogen at the surface changes
the physical characteristics; for example, softening the impact during collisions of
isotopes with the surface and connecting with surface electrons.

3.3. Results with a magnetic ﬁeld:
The introduction of a magnetic ﬁeld in the region where the the glow discharge
plasma interacts with the metal surface has allowed us to achieve tritium generation
rates in the range of 1.1 × 109–9.4 × 109 atom/s, for all of the metals investigated
with a natural mix of hydrogen isotopes. The largest tritium generation rate is found
in the case of tungsten. As was the case for no magnetic ﬁeld, the tritium production
rate is higher for molybdenum and tungsten than for niobium and tantalum.

3.4. Results at diﬀerent pressures:
Results for experiments focused on the dependence of the tritium generation rate on
gas pressure are given in Table 2. From this table it is possible to see the inﬂuence of
pressure, and other parameters, on the tritium generation rate already more clearly
than was presented previously (see Refs. 8 and 9).

3.5. Dependence on deuteron ion energy:
It is not possible to deﬁne precisely the deuteron energy required for tritium gener-
ation from the results. From the results shown in Figure 4 (see [3]), the threshold
Current density (A/cm2)
Coefficient of nuclear interaction
(atom/ion)
Figure 5.

Dependence for coeﬃcient of nuclear interaction versus of a current density in the glow
discharge for Nb and W; 1: niobium (D2); 2: tungsten (D2);2 3: niobium (H2); 4: tungsten (H2);
present work.
energy can be deﬁned roughly; in this case the energy is 100 eV. A reduction in the
tritium generation rate for energies above 100 eV is apparent in curves 2 and 3 of
this ﬁgure; this reduction is associated with a reduction of the current density at
low pressure, and a reduction of the ion energy at increased pressure and voltage.

In the case of tungsten, an increase of the voltage from 360 V up to 490 V, and a
corresponding increase in the current (and hence current density) from 1.9 to 3.1 A,
results in an increase of the tritium generation rate from 1.1 × 107 atom/s up to

9.4 × 109 atom/s (almost on three orders of magnitude). It is possible to conclude:
from these results that the voltage reduction for the discharge down to 400 V or
below is not expedient. The increase in the tritium generation rate with a decrease
in pressure to (6–8) × 103 Pa for all materials supports this conclusion. In spite of
the fact that at reduced pressure for some materials (molybdenum, tungsten) the
voltage fell, an increase in the tritium generation rate was observed; this can be
attributed to a decrease of the energy loss due to collisions at the lower pressure.

This increase in rate occurred even at a signiﬁcant reduction of the current density
(which has a square law dependence on pressure). Thus it is desirable that the ion
energy be much higher 100 eV, according to the dependence exhibited in curve 1.

3.6. Dependence on ion ﬂux:
An increase in the deuteron ion energy and ﬂux results in an increase of the tritium
generation rate. The dependence of the tritium generation rate is monotonic in the
current density, with a power law dependence in the range of 1.2–1.5 (see Fig. 5),
was found previously9.11
The present results show that there exists an optimum ratio of ion energy and
current density. For a decrease of pressure in the case of tungsten from 30.6 × 103 Pa
down to 8 × 103 Pa (and a corresponding reduction of the current density, a factor
of approximately 14), the increase in ion energy (even with a reduction in voltage)
results in an increase of the tritium generation rate from 2.1 × 109 atom/s up to

9.4 × 109 atom/s. However, with a further pressure decrease (approximately two-:
fold) down to 3 × 103 Pa, the tritium generation rate falls on the order of 2–3 orders
of magnitude for Nb, Mo, W. The average current density in this case is lower by
a factor of 4. The current density at a pressure of 8 × 103 Pa is about 1 A/cm2,
with a power law dependence in the range 3–4, which may be considered as the the
optimum for experiments on the tritium generation.

3.7. Temperature of the target-anvil:
In the case of thermal activation, the appearance of tritium exhibits an exponential
dependence of temperature.5 A similar dependence of the rate of tritium production
is not present in these glow discharge experiments. At the same time, the results
for tungsten and lead obtained at lower voltage and current (two last lines of Table
4) are disproportionately low, which indicates a negative inﬂuence on the tritium
generation rate for temperatures is lower than 700–800 K. It is clear that the op-
timum temperatures lay in a range from 900 to 1300 K, as at higher temperatures
the ion energy is reduced (due to thermo-emission).

3.8. Dependence on pressure:
The optimum pressure in the present experiments is in the range 6 × 103 Pa to

8 × 103 Pa (see Fig. 6), which can be compared to previous results.8,11 The main

feature of the present experiments is that the optimum pressure was the same for
all metals. The further decrease of pressure below the peak results in a signiﬁcant
reduction of the tritium generation rate because due primarily to the decrease of
current density, where the increase in ion energy does not compensate the decrease
in current density [see curves 8,9]. For niobium, molybdenum, and tungsten, the
reduction of the tritium generation rate is two to three orders of magnitude.

A decrease in pressure is possible only if the average current density is not lower
than 0.1˚A/cm2. It is known that the braking action of the residual gases results in
a decrease of the energy of accelerated ions, an eﬀect which is reduced considerably
at pressures less than (10–50)Pa. It is clear then that the pressure in the range
of 10 to 50 Pa will be optimum; however, the current density speciﬁed above must
be maintained. The maximum pressure should not exceed 2 × 104 Pa because of a
decrease in ion energy, and even an increase in the discharge voltage.

3.9. Material of the target-anvil:
Satisfactory agreement of the tritium generation rate with predictions made earlier
is obtained.12 The highest tritum generation rates are found in the case of heavier
Coeff. of nuclear interactions, atom/ion. 
10−9 
10−10
10−11 
10−12 
10−13
10−14
Pressure of plasma-forming gas, × 103 Pa. 

5,6,7 − W
(J.A.CM-2)
Figure 6.

Dependence of coeﬃcient of nuclear interaction versus on pressure of plasma-forming
gas in the glow discharge for various materials of the sample-cathode; 1: molybdenum (D2); 2:
tantalum (D2); 3: niobium (D2); 4: niobium +1% of zirconium (D2); 5,6,7: tungsten (D2);8 8:
niobium (H2); 9: tungsten (H2); present work.
metals, such as tungsten and platinum.

Prospective materials include hafnium,
tantalum, osmium, iridium, and gold. It is also possible to consider for use even
heavier metals such as lead, bismuth, thorium, and uranium.

3.10. Plasma-forming gas:
It is shown in [13] that the tritium generation rate for a mix of hydrogen isotopes
based on hydrogen, and a mix based on deuterium, does not exceed one order of
magnitude. This implies that the p + d reaction mechanism for tritium formation
(which is discussed later on in this paper) is a secondary reaction as compared to
the primary p + p reaction that leads to deuterium formation (also discussed later
on), with an associated reaction rate approximately six orders of magnitude smaller.

Therefore, from the point of view of eﬃciency, the use of easier isotopes for excess
heat production and for tritium generation is the the most important factor.

3.11. Magnetic ﬁeld:
It is possible to conclude from dieﬀerent results obtained for coaxial and planar
experimental systems that the self-magnetic ﬁeld inﬂuences the tritium generation
rate. The introduction of an external magnetic ﬁeld of 0.02–0.2T on the discharge
system has allowed us to increase the rate for tritium generation by two orders
of magnitude.14 A careful study of the inﬂuence of intensity, gradient, form of
Power consumption, W. 

Difference of temperatures, K. 

Figure 7.
Dependence for diﬀerence of the temperatures, on measuring base, versus total a power
consumption for hollow sample of vanadium with diameter of 40 mm, height of 60 mm and thickness
of the wall of 2 mm. 1: Sample-cathode, hydrogen, Pc = Psam = 5000Pa; 2: sample-cathode,
hydrogen, Pc = Psam = 10, 000 Pa; 3: sample-cathode, hydrogen, Pc = Psam = 2000 Pa; 4: sample-
cathode, deuterium, Pc = Psam = 2000Pa; 5: sample-anode, deuterium, Pc = Psam = 2000 Pa; 6:
sample-anode, hydrogen, Pc = Psam = 2000Pa.
distribution, polarity, and other characteristics of the magnetic ﬁeld on the discharge
parameters to obtain a further increase of eﬃciency to the discharge system.

3.12. Energy balance:
The dependence of the temperatures diﬀerence on the molybdenum (measuring)
base (and hence the thermal ﬂow from the sample) on the total power for a hollow
vanadium sample with a diameter of 40 mm, a height of 60 mm, and a wall thickness
of 2 mm, for Pc = Psam (background), is shown in Fig. 7. One can see an inﬂection
in the curves at small temperature diﬀerences and low power (about 50-70 W),
which is similar to [3]. This eﬀect, in our opinion, is connected to the onset of
convective heat transfer. It is necessary to keep in mind that at reduced pressure
the sample temperature (and hence temperature diﬀerence) is increased (see curves
1,2), because of a reduction in the convective heat transfer. In this connection, the
smaller temperature diﬀerence for a pressure of 2000 Pa (see curves 3, 4) are caused
by a change of the design used for this pressure. This is due to a diﬀerence in the
approach used for the measurement of the anode temperature, where the distance
between the thermocouples and anode was changed.

For experiments in which the sample is the cathode, the distinction in diﬀer-
ences of temperatures for protium and deuterium is not great (curves 3 and 4).

In experiments in hydrogen in which the sample is the anode, the heat absorbed
Pressure in cavity of the sample, Pa.

Difference of temperatures, K
Figure 8.
Dependence of diﬀerence of temperatures on measuring base versus pressure of the
natural mix of hydrogen isotopes in a cavity of the sample (hollow sample of vanadium, diameter
of 40 mm, height of 60 mm and thickness of a wall of 2 mm). 1: Sample-cathode, E = 820W,
Pc = 10000Pa, T = 840K; 2: sample-cathode, E = 770 W, Pc = 10, 000 Pa, T = 850 K; 3: sample-
cathode, E = 396W, Pc = 10, 000 Pa, T = 680 K; 4: sample-anode, E = 769 W, Pc = 10000Pa,
T = 695 K; 5: sample-cathode, E = 252 W, Pc = 20, 000 Pa, T = 535 K; 6: sample-anode,
E = 388 W, Pc = 10, 000 Pa, T = 550 K.
is approximately half as much as in experiments where the sample is the cathode
(see curves 3, 6). In experiments in deuterium, this diﬀerence is not as signiﬁcant
(see curves 4 and 5). The data obtained allow us to make a thermal balance of the
distribution of heat in the discharge. For example, in a discharge plasma at 2000 Pa
and interelectrode distance 5 mm, about 10% of the total power is lost in the glow
discharge plasma. From the results shown in Fig. 7, it is possible to ﬁnd that for a
hydrogen discharge with the sample as cathode, about 60% of heat is dissipated on
the cathode and about 30% of heat is dissipated on the anode.

The dependence of the base temperature diﬀerence (and hence the power ab-
sorbed by the sample) on the internal pressure of the sample cavity is shown in
Fig. 8. One can see a ﬂat maximum in (0.04–0.1) MPa for the diﬀerent experi-
mental conditions. An additional thermal ﬂux occurs on the sample when ﬁlled
by hydrogen, irrespective whether the sample is the cathode or anode. Hence, to
obtain an identical thermal ﬂux, the discharge power should be increased by two
when the sample is an anode (as compared to when the sample is a cathode, see
curves 3–6).

Table 3.
Measurement of the excess heat ﬂow in the glow discharge with a natural
mix of hydrogen isotopes with forward and reverse ﬂows of hydrogen through the wall
of the cathode sample.
Pd is the discharge power (W); Pc is the chamber pressure (×10−3 Pa); Ps is the
internal sample pressure (×10−3 Pa); Tt is the temperature of top hold-down; ∆T is
the diﬀerence of base temperatures (K); Ts is the sample temperature; Pabs is the
power absorbed by the sample (W); Pxs is the excess power; Pxs/Pd is the ratio of
excess power to the power absorbed by the sample

3.13. Excess heat measurements:
Measurements of the excess heat ﬂow from the cathode sample for a natural mix of
hydrogen isotopes (99.985% protium +0.015% deuterium) are presented in Table 3.

One sees that the excess power is sharply increased with a temperature rise up to
600–700 K; beyond that there is little change. The relative excess power reached
29% from everything absorbed by a sample; for example, at a total discharge power
of 396 W, the sample got 396 × 0.6 =238 W, and thus the absolute values of excess
power is (238 × 0.29 =69), or about 70 W. As compared to all of the power dissipated
by the glow discharge, this excess power is about 10%. The maximum relative values
of the excess heat were observed in the temperature range 600–700K.

Results for a study of the excess thermal ﬂux for deuterium, and for a natural
mix of a hydrogen isotopes (protium + 0.015% deuterium), are shown in Table 4.

Table 4.

Comparison of the excess heat between deuterium and a natural mix of hydrogen isotopes,
for glow discharge experiments with forward and reverse ﬂows of hydrogen through the wall of the
cathode sample.
cathode/
Pd is the discharge power (W); Pc is the chamber pressure (×10−3 Pa); Ps is the internal sample
pressure ×10−3 Pa; Tt is the emperature of top-hold-down (K); ∆T is the temperature diﬀerence
of the base; Ts is the sample temperature (K); Pabs is the power absorbed by the sample (W); Pxs
is the excess power; Pxs/Pd is the ratio of excess power to the power absorbed by the sample
For simpliﬁcation of accounts in case of the scheme which inclusion the sample-
anode, both for protium and for deuterium accepted, that from consumption power
of the discharge the 30% of this power is absorbed by a sample.

It is visible,
that the excess power in experiments with deuterium under identical conditions
is comparable to excess power received in experiments with a natural mix of the
hydrogen isotopes. The excess thermal ﬂows at identical temperatures of samples
with protium and deuterium are comparable as in experiments, when the sample is
the cathode and in experiments, when the sample is the anode.

3.14. Tritium generation:
The dependence of the tritium generation rate on the composition of the plasma-
forming gas is shown in Table 5, where results are given for a natural mix of hydrogen
isotops, and for mixtures containing about 10% deuterium by volume. The use of
a magnetic ﬁeld in the interaction zone where the glow discharge plasma interacts
with the metal surface allowed us to reach a maximum tritium generation rate of

1010 atom/s. This maximum rate was observed in experiments with tungsten. The

addition of deuterium at the 10% level is seen to produce a further increase in
the tritium generation rate. This increase is about 10–20% for molybdenum and
tungsten; for niobium and tantalum the increase of the tritium generation rate is
much larger, by a factor of 4 to 7. This increase in the tritium generation rate did
not correspond to the increase in the deuterium concentration (which in all cases
was increased by almost 4–5 orders of magnitude). The determination of why there
should be such a diﬀerence will be the subject of future research.

Table 5.

Results for the dependence of the tritium generation rate on gas composition and sample
material for glow discharge experiments in a magnetic ﬁeld.
gas
experimental parameters
experimental results
metal
SS is stainless steel; T is the temperature (K); I is the current (A); V is the voltage (V); t is the
run time (h); Pc is the chamber pressure (Pa×103); act. is the tritium activity in counts per second;
ΓT is the tritium generation rate (atoms/sec); yield is the the coeﬃcient of nuclear interaction in
atoms/ion. Powers of 10 indicated with brackets; 1.1[10] = 1.1 × 1010.

3.15. Mass spectroscopy:
We showed previously1 an increase in the mass spectrum of hydrogen isotope peaks
with higher numbers (complexes), associated with the passage of the hydrogen iso-
topes through a membrane heated by thermal radiation or by the glow discharge
plasma (Fig. 9), as compared with a control spectrum taken from gas obtained
Pressure in sample, × 100 Pa. 

Peakheight of sixth mass, arbitrary unit 

Figure 9.
Mass 6 versus pressure.
1: Deuterium ﬂow through valve leak; 2: deuterium ﬂow
through niobium, resistive heating; 3: deuterium ﬂow through niobium, discharge.

Mass-spectrum
Intensity, arb. units.

Mass-spectrum
Intensity, arb. units.
Figure 10.
The mass-spectrum of protium mass for the membrane of vanadium. (a) at 300 K;
(b) in the glow discharge (V = 200 V, J = 50 ˚A/m2, T = 900 K).
through a leak valve. The ﬁxed complexes are stable enough, since they pass through
about one meter of gas before detection in the mass spectrometer. These complexes
can testify to the occurrence in these experiments of new elements, such as deu-
terium or tritium. The appearance of these long-lived complexes may be associated
with the occurrence of excess heat.

In Figs. 10(b) and 11(b) the mass-spectra of a natural mix of hydrogen, and of
Mass-Spectrum
Intensity, arb. units
Mass-spectrum
Intensity, arb. units
(a)
(b)
Figure 11.

The mass-spectrum of deuterium mass for the membrane of vanadium. (a) at 300 K;
(b) in the glow discharge (V = 200 V, J = 50 ˚A/m2, T = 1000 K).

Energy, keV. 

Quantity of pulses, pulse. 
Figure 12.
Background gamma spectrum from the installation with the discharge oﬀ. The expo-
sure time is 7000 s.
deuterium, after passage through the membrane of vanadium is shown, following
irradiation by accelerated ions from the glow discharge plasma. It cam be seem that
from a comparison with the initial spectra (Figs. 10(a) and 11(a)) there occurs in
both cases an increase in heavy complexes; masses 3,4 in the case of hydrogen, and
masses 5,6 in the case of deuterium.

In the case of hydrogen, the mass 3 peak
is stronger than the mass 4 peak. In the case of deuterium, the mass 6 peak is
stronger than the mass 5 peak. This seems reasonable when thought of in terms
of three-atom complexes: the mass 3 peak of H–H–H should be stronger than the
mass 4 peak of H–H–D in the hydrogen discharge; and the mass 6 peak of D–D–D
should be stronger than the mass 5 peak of D–D–H in the deuterium discharge.

The height of the peak with mass 3 for hydrogen reached 50% of the peak with
mass 2; and the height of the peak with mass 6 for deuterium reached 20% of
the from peak with mass 4; following passage of the hydrogen isotopes through
a niobium membrane in glow discharge experiments. It was possible only to ﬁnd
trances of mass 5 and mass 6 in the case of vanadium and niobium in a hydrogen
discharge. It was not possible to observe heavier complexes with mass 7–9 in the
case of vanadium and niobium in a deuterium discharge. It seems clear that the
peaks of mass 3–4 for hydrogen, and mass 5–6 for deuterium, are connected to
deuterium generation in these the glow discharge experiments. Although tritium
generation occurs as reported above, it was not possible to detect tritium through
the use of mass spectrometers due to the low resolution.

3.16. Radiation measurements:
We present in Table 6 results of gamma radiation measurements; where the fore-
ground measurements were taken during discharge operation, and the background
measurements were taken with the discharge oﬀ.

Values for number of counts
(pulses) in the peak areas, along with energies and identiﬁcation of isotopes that
are candidates for lines at the gamma energy. In the background spectra of the
Quantity of pulses, pulse.

Energy, keV.

Figure 13.
Foreground gamma spectrum taken with the discharge on. The exposure time was
also 7000 s.
facility, and in the discharge spectra, there are gamma peaks for U-235, Th-232,
and their disintegration products (Tl-208 and Pb-212); and also K-40 and Cs-137.

The background gamma spectrum in a range 330–590keV is shown in Figure 12;
and the foreground spectrum taken with the discharge on is shown in Figure 13.

The number of counts measured over 700 s at 511± 1 keV with the discharge
on is 45, and with the discharge oﬀ is 74. This diﬀerence corresponds a standard
deviation for this measurement. The number of counts at this energy is so small
Table 6.

The values of pulses quantity for the allocated zones of a γ-spectrum
at working installation, without inclusion of the glow discharge (background) and
at interaction of a natural mix of hydrogen isotopes with niobium at inﬂuence
of the glow discharge and imposing of the magnetic ﬁeld (I = 3,1 ˚A; V = 450 V;
T = 1020 K)
zone
Eγ
peak area
peak area
isotope (parent)
index
KeV
(background)
(with discharge)

Ac-228 (Th-232)
The peak area is in units of counts.
that the associated error is ±50%. Thus it is possible to conclude that positron
generation does not occur in association with the glow discharge at a detectable
level, and that the 511 KeV signal is due to the natural disintegration of Tl-208,
with is a product of Th-232 decay.


4. Discussion

4.1. Tritium generation using the new technique:
With the new experimental technique presented here, in which care is taken to
prevent spurious tritium signals from the equipment and working chamber, we
have evidently demonstrated that the tritium generation rate can be increased.

These results are in the contradiction with tritium evolution due to thermal ac-
tivation, where the apparent tritium generation rate increase exponentially with
temperature.5 Therefore, it is possible to consider these results as contributing to
the proof that the tritium generation observed in the glow discharge discharge ex-
periments has a nuclear origin. It is especially important that signiﬁcant tritium
generation rate is observed using a natural mix of hydrogen isotopes in the (plasma-
forming) gas. The tritium generation rate depends very strongly on the geometry
of the discharge. The reasons for the advantage of the planar glow discharge scheme
for tritium generation are at present not clear.

The low results obtained with helium are essential to an understanding of the
nature of tritium generation. These results can provide estimates for the inﬂuence
of radiating size, thermo-desorption eﬀects, and electro-migration eﬀects, on the
tritium generation rate in similar experiments. These experiments can be carried
out conveniently with other inert gases, in particular, with argon.

The signiﬁcant inﬂuence of the magnetic ﬁeld in the interaction area (for hydro-
gen isotopes with the metal surface metals) on the tritium generation rate supports
the the notion that tritium generation is due to (nuclear reactions), and not due
to thermal activation. The magnetic ﬁeld can impact the tritium generation rate
indirectly through a modiﬁcation of the glow discharge discharge parameters, and
directly through the character of the interaction of the isotopes with the metal sur-
face. In the latter case, the magnetic ﬁeld can inﬂuence the orientation of atoms,
nuclei, and electrons required for tritium generation.

The new approach has shown an opportunity to achieve very signiﬁcant tritium
generation rates, even when a natural mixture of hydrogen isotopes is used. The
demonstrated rate of tritium production in the range 109–1010 atom/s allows it to
be measured using standard scintillation techniques. The rate for tritium generation
production increases with the addition of deuterium, but by an amount less than
an order of magnitude even when the deuterium concentration is increased by 4-5
orders of magnitude. It is possible to conclude from this that the dependence of
the tritium generation rate on the initial deuterium concentration is not as great as
might have been expected.

4.2. Excess power using relative measurements:
The technique used for the measurement of the excess power has advantages, despite
the impossibility of developing an absolute estimate, has advantages as a relative
measurement. The relative measurement can be done with rather high accuracy
(±20%) and good sensitivity (±0.1 W). The primary appeal of this new technique,
which we have developed and reported, is that excess power is considered to be
demonstrated when the temperature increases only when the sample is ﬁlled (rel-
ative to the case where it is evacuated), all other experimental parameters being
equal.

The excess thermal power generation is rather complex a high-temperature pro-
cess; which depends on the interaction of accelerated ions of hydrogen isotopes with
metals in the glow discharge plasma, and with surface processes (such as sorption,
desorption, and solubility). The maximal relative eﬃciency of the excess power
generation is observed in a range of temperatures 600–700K; and and the absolute
eﬃciency is maximized in the range 800–1000K.

The excess heat generation on the sample operating as an anode is approximately
half than when operating as a cathode; hence it is possible to assume that the
basic activation means for the process is a thermal activation. The presence of
an optimum on pressure of hydrogen isotopes in the range 0.04–0.1 MPa (and also
unexpectedly a dependece on the ﬂow), does not yet have a simple explanation. It is
probably associated with the complex kinetics of formation of double and threefold
complexes reported in [1,13] and tritium generation.3,15
Small diﬀerences in the excess heat measured for deuterium, and for anatural mix
of a hydrogen isotopes, shows that in the new approach for excess heat generation
the usual nuclear processes do not play an essential role.

4.3. Tritium generation characteristics:
The experimental scheme with the cylindrical cathode sample is not optimum for
maintaining an acceptable tritium generation rate.4,14 It allows us to obtain a tri-
tium generation rate not above 109 atom/s; which corresponds to estimates of a
maximum quantity of heat at the expense of nuclear reactions arising in low-energy
interaction of hydrogen isotopes with metals at a level on the order of watts,10,13
as we will discuss later on. The excess power values measured in the present work
are in the range 0.5–4.5W.

There is evidence for an increase in deuterium concentration, based on the in-
crease in the mass 3–4 peaks in the mass spectra for a hydrogen discharge, and an
increase in the mass 5–6 peaks in the case of a deuterium discharge. The absence
of mass 7–9 peaks is due to the fact that tritium generation is much slower, and
sensitivity of mass-spectrometers is not suﬃcient for measuring such low levels of
tritium. The implication is that the tritium generation occurs as a secondary p+d
nuclear reaction, and high energy deuterons may be generated from p+p nuclear
reactions, as conﬁrmed by the measurements of the increase of 3–6 mass in the mass
spectrometer data.

With regard to the character of the reactions involved in tritium generation
(during the interaction of hydrogen isotopes with a metal surface during the glow
discharge), the results indicate the following features which have been found in
similar experiments:
(1) Tritium generation does not depend directly on temperature.
(2) Tritium generation depends basically on the experimental parameters that relate to
the of force of interaction of the hydrogen isotopes (current, voltage, characteristics
of the magnetic ﬁeld). With an increase of the voltage and current, the tritium
generation rate grows.
(3) The tritium generation rate has an obvious dependence on the nuclear number
(mass number) of the bombarded material by ions of hydrogen isotopes from the
glow discharge plasma. The best results are obtained in the case of heavy metals,
such as tantalum, tungsten, platinum.
(4) The tritium generation rate does not depend directly on the amount of hydrogen
dissolved in metal.
(5) With the transport by diﬀusion of the hydrogen isotopes through the metal wall
under discharge conditions, tritium collects behind a membrane, instead of before
it. This is contrary to the isotope diﬀusion eﬀect.
(6) Electromigration is also insigniﬁcant in aﬀecting the tritium output from the cath-
ode sample, since in the metals that we used hydrogen is partially ionized with a
positive charge.

4.4. Reaction mechanisms proposed:
It is possible to judge the form of the reactions responsible from experiments with
the detection of gamma radiation near 511 keV. The experiments have shown that
gamma radiation in this area is not registered. Hence, the speciﬁed reactions can
go only as threefold, with catalysis by means of electrons; i.e. the basic reaction in
similar experiments is:
p + e + p
→
d(∼ 2 keV) + ν(∼ 1.95 MeV).
[Such reactions assume electrons inﬂuence of the solid on stability of hydrogen
molecules and speciﬁcity for products of reaction.]
This reaction is remarkable
in that any radioactive byproducts are absent.

Most of the reaction energy is
carried away by the neutrino, soft X-ray radiation is observable, and high-energy
radiation is absent. The energy associated with tritium generation is three orders of
magnitude less that that associated with the energy observed due to the majority
of thermonuclear reactions.

The same reaction can serve a source of energetic
deuterons for similar reactions based on p+e+d. Hence tritium generation under the
conditions speciﬁed can occur in pure hydrogen, without deuterium as an impurity.

The rate of secondary nuclear reactions is smaller on average in the range 10−5–10−7
(with an average of 10−6).

Since the maximum tritium generation rate was observed for mixtures of hydro-
gen and deuterium, we believe that the tritium was formed not from thermonuclear
D–D reactions, but instead from
p + e + d
→
T(∼ 6 keV) + ν(∼ 5.98 MeV).

Such reaction can proceed due to impurity deuterium in hydrogen and through
secondary deuterons formed from p + e + p reactions. The measured power for this
reaction is also three orders of magnitude lower than the power from the majority
of thermonuclear reactions. A similar reaction can result in the formation of 4He:

The reactions proposed correspond best in our opinion to observable products in
the majority of experiments on the low-energy interaction of the hydrogen isotopes
with metals in measurements of deuterium, tritium, helium-4, excess heat and X-ray
radiation with the certain energy.

4.5. Reaction strength:
It is known that the coupling constant for weak interactions of particles is approxi-
mately ﬁve orders of magnitude less than for the strong force, and cross sections for
weak interactions are approximately 14 orders of magnitude less than for the strong
force. However, the corresponding interaction time for weak interactions has a large
duration (more than 10−8 s), which can aﬀect the character of the interaction. Weak
reactions can go spontaneously at low energy (beta-disintegration).

If the instability of hydrogen atoms or molecules (interacting with electrons in
the energetic ﬁeld of metals) will be proved, the signiﬁcant reduction of the inﬂuence
of the Coulomb barrier on the proposed reactions can compensate to increase the
reaction cross section associated with weak interactions. Hence if the cross section
of the proposed reactions occur at a level 10−40–10−30 cm2 (instead of 10−25 cm2,
as is the case for the strong force) even this cross section can appear suﬃcient for
practical applications, even though it is connected to substantial growth of an active
zone. That weak interactions can occur only on a much smaller distance scale, in
comparison with the strong force (10−18 m in comparison with 10−15–10−16 m) is
in this case not the determining factor. The conventional thermonuclear reactions
have low interaction cross sections, even at energies of several MeV. These thermo-
nuclear reactions go with a small speed, even at small distances between nucleons.

Therefore, when the complex p + d + d (having received energy in plasma of the
glow discharge and having collided with a metal target, which in this case plays a
anvil role) begins collapsing a thermonuclear reaction probably goes, but we can
not observe it because of the low interaction cross section. Further that distance
p+d theoretically can be as much as small and possible to decrease of the Coulomb
barrier in a complex p + d + p or p + d + d, practically, up to zero. Even energies
of some hundreds of electron volts appears to be suﬃcient for collisions of the
speciﬁed complexes down to distances on the order of 10−18 m due to shielding.

There is enough to time for the course of such processes a stationary glow discharge
plasma (∼10 ms).

4.6. Resulting estimates and potential appliciations:
The results presented show that if we assume the novel p + e + d reactions13 dis-
cussed above, and take the observed tritium generation rate of 1010 atom/s, then
the resulting thermal power is about 10−5 W. If we proceed from the assumption
that tritium generation is a consequence of much more intense p + e + p reactions
with (KeV) deuterium formation (where tritium results approximately one in 106
of time) the tritium generation rate measured implies a thermal generation from
the new p + e + p reactions discussed above at a power level of about 10 W. These
estimates correspond to our experiments on excess heat production.3,16 For the de-
velopment of thermal energy due to nuclear reactions at a level comparable with
the input electrical energy (some kW), the tritium generation rate should would
need to be about 1012 atom/s.

There has been at least one hundred models and theories proposed, but none of
them can give an unequivocal explanation for the experimental data. Nevertheless,
such features of the new proposed reactions have an overwhelming advantage with
the participation only of protons, and since the only radioactive product present is
tritium in small amounts.

This allows us to plan the basic directions of practical
use of nuclear reactions arising from the low-energy interaction of hydrogen isotopes
with metals:
- Power
- Wastes storage and processing
(A) Wastes processing with tritium.
(B) Processing of high active, heavy wastes.
- Production of rare isotopes.
- Development of new materials.
- Isotope light sources and energy.
- Generators of coherent radiation (Lasers).


5. Conclusions

(1) The introduction of a magnetic ﬁeld perpendicular to the sample surface (in the
interaction of hydrogen isotopes with metals in the glow discharge plasma) has re-
sulted in an increase in the observed tritium activity, and in the tritium generation
rate, by almost two orders of magnitude, as compared with the same experiments
with no magnetic ﬁeld.
(2) Tritium generation rates as high as 109–1010 atom/s have been observed in glow
discharge experiments with mixtures of hydrogen isotopes in a glow discharge
operating in a magnetic ﬁeld, exceeding the test background level by three to four
orders of magnitude. The use of a magnetic ﬁeld has ensured good reproducibility
for these results, and the reliable achievement of a tritium generation rate near
1010 atom/s in the case of tantalum, tungsten, and platinum.

(3) A new technique for excess heat generation and detection has been proposed, in
which the transfusion of hydrogen isotopes occurs through the metal wall of a
hollow tight sample (in the direction to the glow discharge) where the sample con-
stitutes one of the discharge electrodes. For samples of vanadium, the maximum
excess thermal power is about about 30% of the power absorbed by the sample
(when operating as a cathode). Excess power generation is optimized at temper-
atures in the range 600–700 (for relative power) and 800-1000 K (for the absolute
power).
(4) In the spectra taken with a mass spectrometer, the appearance of mass 3 and 4
peaks in the case of a hydrogen discharge, and the appearance of mass 5 and mass
6 peaks in the case of a deuterium discharge (as compared to spectra taken under
thermal activation), supports the conjecture that deuterium is generated in the
experiments.
(5) The gamma spectrum of the working installation with the discharge included, and
without, diﬀered a little. The diﬀerence between the two measurements did not
exceed the estimated experimental error of ±50%. Thus it is possible to assert that
there is no signiﬁcant generation of positrons during glow discharge operation.
(6) Features of the experiments discussed in this work are consistent with a nuclear
origin of tritium generation (arising from the interaction of the glow discharge
plasma with a metal surface), and not consistent with conventional tritium evolu-
tion through thermal activation.
(7) The established increase of the amount of deuterium which is observable (associ-
ated with the interaction of hydrogen isotopes with metals in the glow discharge
plasma) for mixes of isotopes (both in the case of hydrogen gas, and deuterium
gas) from mass spectroscopic measurements; and the incommensurate increase in
the tritium generation rate as a function of deuterium concentration; and absence
of positrons; together, allow us to assert that the nuclear reactions p+p and p+d
(with the corresponding formation of deuterium and tritium) proceed through
electronic catalysis as p + e + p and p + e + d.
(8) It is a stated assumption that for the generation of thermal energy at a level of
about 1 kW, an associated tritium generation rate of about 1012 atom/s would
occur, based on the low energy nuclear reactions under discussion in this work.


References

1. V.A. Romodanov, V.I. Savin, M.V. Shakhurin et al., Zhurnal Tekhnicheskoy Fiziki,
61(5), 122–125 (1991) (in Russian).
2. V.A. Romodanov, V.I. Savin, Ya.B. Skuratnik and Yu.M. Timofeev, Reaction of Nu-
clear Fusion in Condensed Matter - Voprosy Atomnoj Nauki i Tekhniki. Ser: Radiation
Damage Physics and Radiation Technology, 1992, 1(58), 2(59), 73–82. (In Russian).
3. V.A. Romodanov, V. Savin, Ya. Skuratnik and Yu. Timofeev, in Proceedings of the
ICCF-3, Nagoya, Japan, ed. H Ikegami (Universal Academy Press Inc., Tokyo, Japan,
1993), pp. 307–319.
4. V.A. Romodanov, V.I. Savin, Ya.B. Skuratnik, in Proceedings of the ICCF-6, Japan,
Vol. 2, ed. M Okamoto (Published by NEDO, IAE. Tokyo, Japan, 1996), pp. 585–589.
5. A. Vitaliy Romodanov, I. Valeriy Savin, B. Yakov Skuratnik and N. Valeriy Majorov,
in Proceedings of the ICCF-7, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, ed. G Miley
(Published by ENECO, Inc., Salt Lake Sity, Utah, USA, 1998), pp. 319–324.
6. V.A. Romodanov, Ya.B. Skuratnik and A.K. Pokrovsky, in Proceedings of the ICCF-8,
Vol. 70, ed. F Scaramuzzi (Published by IPS, Bologna, Italy, 2000), pp. 265–268.
7. V.A. Romodanov and Y.B. Skuratnik, Tritium Registration in Metal-Hydrogen Sys-
tems - Cold Nuclear Fusion (Materials of the 9-d Russian conference on cold fusion and
nuclei transmutation. Sochi, Russian, 30.09-07.10.2001y) M.: SRC PTP “ERZION”,
2002, p. 55-62. (In Russian).
8. V. Romodanov, V. Savin, Ya. Skuratnik and V. Elksnin, in Proceedings of the ICCF-4,
Lahaina, Maui (Hawaii TR-104188-V3, EPRI, 1994), pp. 1–15.
9. V.A. Romodanov, V.I. Savin, Ya.B. Skuratnik, Yu.N. Zhivluk and A.K. Pokrovskiy,
in Proceedings of the ICENES-8’96, Vol. 2, ed. AV Zrodnikov, Russia, IPPE, Obninsk,
Kaluga Region, Russia, 1997, pp. 504–511.
10. V.A. Romodanov, Prospects to Intensity Increase of the Nuclear Reactions at Low-
Energy Interaction of Hydrogen Isotopes and Possible Areas of their Application -
Submitted on ICCF-10.
11. V.A. Romodanov, V.I. Savin, Ya.B. Skuratnik and V.N.Majorov, in Proceedings of the
ICCF-6, Japan, Vol. 1, ed. M Okamoto (Published by NEDO, IAE, Tokyo, Japan,
1996), pp. 340–346.
12. V. Romodanov, V. Savin, Ya. Skuratnik and S. Korneev, in Proceedings of the ICCF-4,
Lahaina, Maui, Hawaii. TR-104188-V3, EPRI, 1994, p. 22(1–13).
13. V.A. Romodanov, The Research of Positrons Annihilation and Possible Ways of P +D
Nuclear Reactions - Submitted on ICCF-10.
14. V.A. Romodanov, The Tritium Generation at Low-Energy Interaction of Hydrogen
Isotopes with Metals - Submitted on ICCF-10.
15. A. Vitaliy Romodanov, I. Valeriy Savin, B. Yakov Skuratnik, F. Boris Kostenko, S.
Vladilen Barashenkov and Z. Michael Yuriev, in Proceedings of the ICCF-7, Vancou-
ver, British Columbia, Canada, ed. G Miley (Published by ENECO, Inc., Salt Lake
Sity, Utah, USA, 1998), pp. 325–329.
16. V.A. Romodanov, The Registration of Excess Heat Which Arise at Metal Interaction
with Hydrogen Isotopes - Submitted on ICCF-10.
