1. Introduction
The March 23, 1989 announcement by Martin Fleischmann and Stanley Pons of the possibility of nuclear fusion in an
electrochemical system of heavy water (D2O) and Pd generated worldwide interest [1–3]. Since then, small groups
of researchers have been trying to replicate these claims without definitive success. Some experimental observations
of anomalous heat effects (AHE) were made using calibrated calorimetry [4]. Others have claimed the correlated
generation of He as a reaction byproduct [5], thus lending credence to the conjecture that a nuclear reaction may be
taking place in the system.

Unfortunately, almost no published reports describe the specific steps necessary to independently reproduce claims
of AHE reliably starting from commercially available materials and equipment. While preparation of the Pd cathode
is proposed to be a crucial determinant of success [6], descriptions of specific cathode preparation procedures along
with quantitative material properties are rare. Furthermore, there is no consensus within the research community about
what kind of material preparation is required to observe the effect.

The dual-laser experiment (DLE) published by Dennis Letts [7,8] is a rare example of a report of AHE combined
with sufficient documentation for a replication attempt. The reports of Letts et al. claim that a sufficiently prepared
Pd cathode plated with Au will exhibit excess heat on the order of 100–300 mW in response to stimulation by two
lasers having a frequency difference tuned to speciﬁc peaks in the THz range. These peaks coincide with phonon
resonance frequencies of Pd, making the reports even more remarkable. Letts et al. [7,8] document the speciﬁc
material preparation and measurement steps making a high ﬁdelity replication attempt feasible. Letts claimed a 95%
replication rate of AHE by following his protocol [8].

The DLE merits replication for another reason: the low energy nuclear reactions research community considers
it an important result to build upon. For example, it provides experimental support for Peter Hagelstein’s theoretical
explanations of AHE, and it was referenced at least twice in oral presentations at the International Conference on
Condensed Matter Nuclear Science (ICCF-19) in April 2015 [9,10].

This report describes our attempt to replicate the DLE, based on published reports and limited additional input
from Letts. We did not observe the laser-triggered excess heat effects described by Letts et al. but we learned a lot
about the experimental apparatus. We speculate on possible reasons for our different result, and suggest ways in which
the DLE could be improved to make other replication attempts more straightforward.


2. Experiment

Letts concluded a 2015 publication [8] with the following:
“The dual-laser experiments seem to support these conclusions:
(1) Three speciﬁc beat frequencies will trigger excess power in a deuterated cathode.
(2) Cathode fabrication, loading and laser application protocols enable excess power.
(3) An external magnetic ﬁeld is required and its affect (sic) is linear.
(4) Polarization of the laser beams affects excess power.
(5) Plating gold on the cathode surface after loading is required to produce excess power.
(6) Higher cell temperature produces larger excess power and is exponential in effect.
(7) The dual-laser effect is highly reproducible when protocols are followed.”
Our experimental procedure was designed to closely replicate the protocol described in Letts JCMNS 2010, with
additional input obtained via personal correspondence with Letts [11]

2.1. Materials preparation:
Letts suggested that we use the 17-step procedure provided in his ASTI 2004 presentation [12] as our principal guide
for cathode preparation. The 17 steps are summarized below:
Step 1 : The starting material was 0.5 mm thick palladium foil, Alfa Aesar #11514 (99.9% purity metals basis). A
piece of the material, ∼10 mm × 8 mm in size was cut from the foil with the use of a Dremel rotary tool with
a diamond wheel cutter attachment.
Step 2 : This piece is polished using a polishing compound (Custom Chemical Packaging Pol-Gel, a rebranded version
of the 10,000 grit Nicsand used in the original work) and the Dremel tool ﬁrst with a metal and then with a
ﬁber brush attachment. The polishing generally results in a mirror-like ﬁnish.
Step 3 : The resulting piece is rinsed in either tap or distilled water.
Step 4 : The piece is then annealed in a benchtop furnace (Thermolyne type 1300) to 750◦C for 3 h, then allowed to
cool in air overnight. This procedure and all subsequent annealing steps result in a blue-green surface sheen
attributed to oxide.
Step 5 . Next the piece was etched in aqua regia (1:3 HNO3:HCl) for 2–10 min. It was found that some degree of
variability resulted from this procedure, in some instances completely removing the oxide layer and resulting
in a speckled shiny surface, while in other instances the oxide coating was incompletely removed. In some
instances the aqua regia was used after waiting a few hours as was the standard procedure known to the author,
while in others it was used immediately after mixing on instructions from Letts [9].
Step 6 . After etching, the piece is washed in distilled water, then re-polished using the same procedure as above
(Steps 2 and 3).
Step 7 : Repeat Step 6.
Step 8 . The piece is then cleaned in an ultrasonic bath with distilled water for 5 min, then...
Step 9 : . . . annealed at 850◦C for 2.5 h and allowed to cool overnight.
Step 10 : Afterwards, the piece is re-polished (resulting in the removal of the oxide ﬁlm) and ...
Step 11 : . . . ultrasonically cleaned in either 1:1 H2O:IPA or a ∼15% solution of Cole-Parmer ultrasonic compound
remover . The decision to use the former was based on the procedure’s description of “compound remover”,
the latter was used based on the speciﬁc suggestion of Letts [9].
Step 12 : Next the piece was cold-rolled with a Woodward Fab slip roller cleaned with acetone prior to each use.
Several passes through the roller (∼5–10) were necessary to achieve the target thickness of 250 µm speciﬁed
in the procedure, veriﬁed with a set of calipers. The piece was rotated 90◦ each pass through the roller.
Step 13 : Subsequent to the rolling, the piece is polished, ...
Step 14 : . . . ultrasonically cleaned (Step 8), ...
Step 15 : . . . annealed at 850◦C (Step 9), and
Step 16 : . . . etched in aqua regia as described previously (Step 5).
Step 17 : The piece is then ready to be cut into 2–3 rectangular coupons 5 mm × 10 mm in size for use in the experi-
ment.

The ﬁnal wash applied to the sample varied between experiments, see Supplemental Information for details.

2.1.1. Cathode material supplied by Letts:
For one experiment (DLER7), cathode material was supplied directly by Letts, from a batch that had successfully
produced excess heat from the dual-laser effect in his May 2012 experiment. In two other runs (DLER10 and DLER11),
the material was processed by us, except for the ﬁnal etch (Step 16 above), which was performed by Letts. See Table 1
for experimental designations.

2.1.2. Cathode material supplied by Coolescence LLC:
For experiment DLER17, the cathode material was supplied by Coolescence LLC. The foil sample was mechanically
mounted in a PEEK (polyether ether ketone) assembly during measurement.

Figure 1.
(a) A depiction of the entire apparatus. The cell and magnets rest on a wire frame grating of the temperature enclosure. See Supplemen-
tary Information for more details. (b) The measurement cell. For 4-wire resistance measurement, four additional wires were connected to cathode.
These are omitted from the ﬁgure for clarity.

2.2. Setup description:
Experiments were conducted in a custom-built, temperature controlled enclosure consisting of a modiﬁed commercial
beverage cooler outﬁtted with a system of fans and bafﬂes to circulate air, and a heating wire controlled with a Keysight
E3632A power supply (see Supplemental Information). The enclosure temperature was determined from an average
of either two or four thermistors located inside the enclosure, and a software-controlled PID loop controlled the heater
wire voltage using this input.

The cell consisted of a 300 mL borosilicate lab beaker (Kimble KIMAX #14020) with a custom-built Teﬂon cell
cap (see Fig 1 and Supplemental Information). Feedthroughs for temperature probes were constructed by taking 5
mm OD glass tubing (Ginsberg Scientiﬁc #5MMSLT-24) and sealing one end completely with a butane torch. Into
these tubes were inserted Measurement Specialties 44004RC thermistors, and the back end of the tube was sealed
with superglue. Feedthroughs for the three electrodes (the Pd cathode, and the Pt and Au anodes) were constructed
as follows: First, a piece of 500 µm diameter Pt wire (Alfa Aesar #43288) was soldered onto Cu wire. Then one end
of a piece of glass tubing was sealed around the Pt wire. Next, the wire was either laser-welded onto the Pd cathode,
shaped into a coil for the Pt anode, or in the case of the Au anode a small bunch of Au wire (Alfa Aesar #10968) was
melted onto the end of the Pt wire. A depiction of the entire apparatus (cell plus enclosure) is shown in Fig. 1.

Cell current was provided by a second Keysight E3632A power supply. The thermistors were measured with
a digital multimeter/switch combination from National Instruments, models PXI-4070 and PXI-2503. Temperature
measurements were conducted using built-in LabVIEW routines for thermistor measurement at 10 kΩ range, which
is the equivalent of a 2-wire resistance measurement as speciﬁed by National Instruments [13]. The PXI-2503 device
switches the input to the PXI-4070 DMM between the thermistor leads. All data including cell current, cell voltage,
and thermistor temperatures were recorded with SignalExpress every 10 s. This acquisition loop was maintained
throughout the 2–3 week timeline for each run.

The feedthrough junctions were sealed at the top of the cell cap with Buna 008 O-rings. The cell was operated
vented to the air through a tube, so that recombiner operation could be tested by immersing the end of the tube in
water. During most runs this was not necessary, as signiﬁcant electrolyte loss was not observed. Recombiner pellets
consisting of platinum reduced onto alumina (Alfa Aesar #89106) were wedged into a groove cut into cell cap.

For most experiments, the electrolyte was 90 mL of 0.5 M LiOD made by dissolving Li metal pellets (Sigma-
Aldrich #499811) into D2O (99.9 atom %, Sigma-Aldrich #151882). For one experiment (DLER11) the electrolyte
concentration was lowered to 0.1 M on the assumption that this might aid in the plating process.

The laser system employed consisted of two identical laser diode kits (Thorlabs LTC-100B). Each kit included a
laser diode mount as well as current and temperature controllers. The laser wavelength of each diode was controlled
by varying the case temperature using the supplied temperature controllers. The diodes employed varied based on the
speciﬁc detuning frequencies being targeted, including Thorlabs models HL6501MG , HL6750MG and HL6756MG .
“P” polarization was maintained for most experiments reported, as is summarized in Table 1.

2.3. Loading and resistance ratio:
In accordance with procedures reported by Letts [7], electrolysis current was held at 50 mA for at least 120 h with
an enclosure temperature setpoint of 15◦C. For experiments DLER16B and DLER17, a stepped current protocol was
used that consisted of 12+ h at 10 mA, and 4+ h each of 25, 50, 100, and 200 mA, as suggested by Coolescence LLC.

Certain experiments were performed with four additional laser welds connecting to the cathode with the purpose
of measuring the resistance across the cathode using a 4-terminal AC resistance meter (Hioki 3561).

2.4. Data preparation:
In order to use the system identiﬁcation codes that ﬁt a model differential equation to the dynamics of the calorimeter,
we ﬁrst interpolate all of the data onto a grid that is uniformly sampled at 10 s intervals. Although not essential, we
then apply a 60 s low pass ﬁlter to the data to reduce the measurement noise. We believe that this degree of ﬁltering is
justiﬁable given that the calorimeter has a time constant on the order of 1800 s and as a result, for all real heat inputs,
the calorimeter itself acts like a low pass ﬁlter with a time constant 30 times longer than the applied low pass ﬁlter.
Nevertheless, we ran our analysis both with and without the 60 s low pass ﬁlter; the interpretation did not change.

2.5. Calibration:
The main objective of calibration is to quantify the relationship between power input to the calorimeter and temperature
measurements. Central to our calibration was to quantify the uncertainty in differences between measured and modeled
temperature changes because these differences could be signatures of excess heat, but they could also be artifacts. We
calibrated the system on a per-run basis, after loading and prior to gold plating and laser triggering, using the heat
supplied by electrolytic current, icell in the absence of the laser trigger to excite the system and measure its thermal
response.

The simplest model one can ﬁt to the calorimeter’s dynamic temperature measurements, ∆T(t), has one heat
capacity, c and one thermal conductance, k:
d∆T/dt = -k∆T/c +Qin/c.

∆T(t) is the difference between the cell temperature and the inside temperature of the enclosure containing the
calorimeter. The enclosure temperature during calibration was controlled at approximately 23◦C, as was earlier done
by Letts [7]. The input power, Qin(t), originates from the power applied to the cell. As is well known, an amount of
power icellv0 goes into splitting water into oxygen and deuterium, which is then converted back into water at the recom-
biner; v0 is the thermoneutral voltage, which for deuterium is approximately 1.53 V. Letts treats this power as leaving
the system without reaching the cell temperature sensors [14]. We modeled the calorimeter power according to Letts’
assumption that the recombiner power escapes without affecting the temperature sensor (Qin(t) = icell(vcell − v0))
and also according to the “all power reaches the sensor” assumption: Qin(t) = icellvcell. For each of the seven cathode
experiments that we calibrated, the latter analysis produced a better ﬁt with the exception of DLER7 which was not
signiﬁcantly different. The results reported in this document analyze the data using Qin(t) = icellvcell
The calorimeter thermal parameters c and k were determined using the MATLAB System Identiﬁcation Toolbox
to ﬁt a dynamic time series of temperature and power throughout a series of applied current transitions between 50
mA and 1.5 A that excite the thermal dynamics of the calorimeter. Data collection for the calibration phase of each
experimental run took 1–2 days. Example ﬁts to measurement data appear in Section 3. An example of ﬁtting both with
and without subtraction of the water splitting power is shown in the Linear Calibration section of the supplementary
information.

2.6. Gold plating procedure:
After calibration, Au plating onto the Pd surface was attempted by connecting the Au anode electrically in parallel
with the Pt anode. Since this aspect of the procedure is incompletely described in Letts [7], several plating times were
employed by various experiments (as low as 10 min and as high as ∼14 h, corresponding with Letts’ description [9])
with some laser trials performed after each plating attempt (see Table 1). The surface was usually observed to be black
at the end of the experiment after the current was switched off; during operation, the bubble sheath around the cathode
made the observation of the surface difﬁcult.

2.7. Laser triggering:
After the plating step, the electrical power applied to the cell was held constant and the temperature was allowed to
stabilize; this established the ﬁrst part of the baseline heat rate Qout,notrig. A series of laser triggering trials was
then conducted to establish triggered excess heat, Qout,trig, followed by another period without laser stimulation,
which established the second baseline portion of Qout,notrig. The lasers were operated in a constant current mode,
with their outputs kept to ∼10 mW each. The beams incident on the sample were kept to ∼1–2 mm in diameter,
and mostly collimated over the ∼60 cm distance between the diodes and the cathode. P polarization (parallel to
plane of incidence) was maintained for most experiments, in correspondence with the protocol (see Fig. 2); alternate
polarization conﬁgurations were tested a few times (see Table 1). Lasers were incident on the sample generally for 40
min to 1 h at a time; however, longer time periods of up to 3–4 h were tested as well.

2.8. Excess heat and uncertainty analysis:
Excess heat attributable to the laser trigger is expressed by:
Q(excess,trig)=Q(out,trig)−Q(out,notrig),
where Qout,notrig is the averaged output power when there is no trigger applied, and Qout,trig is the power ﬂowing
out of the calorimeter while the laser trigger is applied. In terms of temperature and conductance, k, this expression
becomes:
Qexcess,trig = k(∆Ttrig − ∆Tnotrig) = k(Ttrig,cell − Ttrig,surroundings − ∆Tnotrig).

Figure 2.
Schematic of “P” polarization used for most experiments.

If one assumes that the sources of uncertainty are uncorrelated, then the uncertainty associated with this computation,
σQexcess,trig, is the 2-norm of the individual uncertainties:
σQexcess,trig =
σ1 = σk
   ⟨ Ttrig,cell − Ttrig,surroundings − ∆Tnotrig ⟩t
   
uncertainty in thermal conductance,
σ2 = kσTtrig,cell
cell temperature variance during triger,
σ3 = kσTtrig,surroundings
surroundings temperature variance during triger,
σ4 = kσ∆ Tnotrig
untriggered baseline temperature variance.
σk is the uncertainty in thermal conductance determined from the calorimeter calibration, and ⟨ ⟩t denotes a time
averaged quantity. Note that this uncertainty estimate is not the most conservative. If we make no assumption about
the correlation, then the total uncertainty is bounded by the 1-norm of the four uncertainties above:
σQexcess,bound ≤ σ1 + σ2 + σ3 + σ4.

Typically the largest source of uncertainty is in σ4, the establishment of a stable baseline before and after the application
of the laser trigger as will be discussed in Section 3.

It is worth noting that the uncertainty analysis that we apply herein differs from that practiced by Hagelstein and
Letts. They used the goodness-of-ﬁt to an exponential relaxation time to model the triggered temperature rise in order
to estimate the uncertainty of their excess power observations. Also, it is notable that the error bars on our results
in Fig.
9 are larger than those in the comparable work by Hagelstein and Letts [17]. Details of the method used
by Hagelstein and Letts were not provided; however, we make three observations: (1) typically, we see no triggered
temperature rise, which makes use of the Hagelstein-Letts technique problematic. (2) The relaxation time model used
by Hagelstein and Letts presumed that excess heat signatures appeared as a step change in the calorimeter. While
this presumption may be appropriate for their dataset, that is not the case in the present work. (3) The detailed
uncertainty estimation methods used by Hagelstein and Letts are not included in their publication. It is possible that
some uncertainties in both the thermal parameters and the temperature measurements may not be fully accounted for
in the Hagelstein Letts uncertainty estimation method.

Table 1.
Summary of experiments discussed in this manuscript.


3. Results

In an attempt to demonstrate the open access to both experimental methods and raw data that is necessary for collegial
and conclusory scientiﬁc progress, the raw data for the experiments in Table 1 and discussed below are available here.

Figure 3.
Typical enclosure temperature stability. Inset shows early time stabilization period.

Figure 4.
Example of anti-correlated electrolyte temperature sensing instability occurring during calibration period. Inset focuses on time period
where instability occurs.

3.1. Materials preparation:
The materials preparation end-points speciﬁed by Letts in his published works consist primarily of visual descriptions
of the resulting surface after polishing, annealing, and etching. These were generally achieved in the present work.
However, due to the inability to visually determine properties such as surface r.m.s. roughness, surface-based impurity
concentration, oxide thickness after etching, or other potentially relevant material parameters, it is unclear whether our
produced material matched that obtained by Letts in the original work by quantitative measures.

3.2. Enclosure temperature:
Maintaining a constant enclosure temperature was essential for the calorimetry practiced in this experiment. A repre-
sentative example of temperature measurements over a 70 h run is shown in Fig. 3.

The abbreviations LL, LR, UL, and UR refer to lower left, lower right upper left and upper right locations in the
enclosure respectively. This dataset, which was typical, illustrated a number of important details. As shown in the
inset, we saw that the control loop that stabilizes the enclosure temperature leveled out after several hours. Although
likely adequate for this experiment, there remained a small oscillation at about 3.5 mHz (∼5 min period) which was
undesirably close to the roughly 25 min thermal relaxation time of the calorimeter. Assuming that the source of these
ﬂuctuations was the software-based PID loop controlling the enclosure temperature, a more judicious choice of the
proportional, integral and derivative gain parameters might have eliminated the oscillation.

Figure 5.
Example of single-thermistor temperature sensing instability.

The four measurements agreed to within 0.8◦C when in equilibrium. The sensor data had a noise amplitude of on
the order of 0.2◦C; The apparent increase in sensor noise at hour 25 correlated with an increase in applied cell power.
The sensor noise appeared to not be completely correlated because the mean enclosure temperature was less noisy
than the individually measured temperatures. Based on these ﬁndings, we used the time varying mean of all of the
enclosure temperature measurements for data analysis purposes.

3.3. Electrolyte temperature sensing instability:
All experiments analyzed showed evidence of temperature sensing instability. Such instability interfered directly with
attempts to interpret temperature changes as anomalous heat. A representative example in Fig. 4 shows thermistor and
power measurements before, during and after a plateau in applied power.

Between hour 10 and hour 15, while the input power and enclosure temperature were relatively stable, the two cell
temperature measurements were not stable; they shifted in opposite directions. One plausible explanation is that the
cap that holds the glass tubes containing both thermistors was tilting and causing thermistor 1 to move further from
the electrodes and thermistor 2 to move closer to them. We note that the cap had an o-ring seal that was press-ﬁt into
the glass beaker. The magnitude of the temperature shift was about 0.5 and 1.2◦C for the ﬁrst and second sensors,
respectively.

Other observations of cell temperature sensing instability suggest that individual thermistors might have shifted
position in the electrolyte during the runs, as shown in Fig. 5. In this example, between hours 19 and 40, under
constant applied power, the ﬁrst thermistor rose monotonically as expected while the second thermistor fell about
1.5◦C in several steps.

Figure 6.
Model ﬁts to the two cell temperature readings obtained during run DLER7-2. Delta (◦C) corresponds to temperature difference between
cell and enclosure.


3.4. Calorimeter calibration observations:
When the ordinary differential equation described in Section 2.5 was applied to calibration data we obtained values for
the calorimeter’s lumped parameter heat capacity,c, and thermal conductance, k, as well as the standard deviations for
these parameters. The thermal conductance in particular was essential for the analysis of the laser trigger experiment
because the input power during that experiment was held constant, and in steady state, the temperature rise of the
calorimeter is k∆T.

Figure 6 shows the residual, eT = ∆Tmeasured − ∆Tmodeled, of the ﬁt to cell temperatures 1 and 2 measured
during run DLER7-2 (cathode run DLER7, data set 2), a portion of which is shown in Fig. 5. The insets of each plot
show the measured and modeled temperatures overlaid, illustrating the importance of viewing residuals to assess the
ﬁt. The input data used for the ﬁt is the power time series, icellvcell. As expected, we obtained a better ﬁt using cell
temperature 1, which appeared to be more stable, particularly between hours 20 and 40 (note differences in scale). For
each experimental run, we determined which sensor was more reliable based on the ﬁt to the model. This sensor, 1 in
the example provided, was used for analyzing the laser trigger experiments.

The difference between modeled and measured temperature provided an indication of calorimeter accuracy. The
product keT of the temperature residual, eT , and the thermal conductance during calibration is a direct measure of
anomalous heat that arises from artifacts (mechanical, electrical, etc.) during calibration and is an indication of heat
artifacts that could have arisen during experimentation. In all nine runs, we kept track of the largest heat artifacts that
arose during each calibration; these ranged in magnitude from 0.13 to 0.46 W. Many of these artifacts appeared as
brief disturbances to the thermometry during changes to the input power.

3.5. Attempts at excess heat observations:
A representative time series of enclosure and cell temperatures and applied power is shown in Fig. 7. Triangles indicate
the times at which laser triggers were applied, altered to a new difference frequency, and ended. The time series, which
is over 70 h long, includes measurements on two separate days.

Figure 8 shows instantaneous excess heat measurements inferred from the temperature changes relative to the
average baseline temperatures (plotted in gray) prior to and after each series of laser triggers. Each color change (blue,
red, green, cyan, and magenta) indicates the application of a new difference frequency to the cathode. The horizontal
bars above and below the excess heat measurements represent one standard deviation on the excess heat measurement
at each laser difference frequency.

The laser power input was not observed, as it tended to be below the noise ﬂoor. The results of the laser trials
of experiment DLER7-3 are summarized in Table 2. In both laser trial series, we observed that the excess heat rate
baselines before and after the laser trials differed by 10’s of mW. We attribute this to calorimeter drift, as referenced
previously.

By far, the largest contribution to the excess heat measurement uncertainty is σ4, the untriggered baseline temper-
ature variance; this uncertainty ranged from about 15 to 21 mW. Clearly, a priority for any redesign of this experiment
would be to stabilize the temperature measurements to establish a more accurate baseline. The next largest source of
error is σ2, cell temperature variance during trigger. This uncertainty contribution was as large as 18 mW. Note that
we did not see evidence of an exponential rise upon triggering as reported in reference [7]. Had we observed such an
exponential rise, this uncertainty term would have been modiﬁed by an accounting for an exponential ﬁt to the output
power. The next largest source of uncertainty is σ3, the surroundings temperature variance during the trigger; this un-
certainty contribution ranged up to about 8 mW. The smallest uncertainty contribution was from the uncertainty in the
thermal conductance out of the calorimeter determined from the calibration of the calorimeter. This further illustrates
how a triggered excess heat experiment such as this is not very sensitive to the calibration method and is primarily
affected by sensor stability.

Figure 7.
Representative laser trial data taken over a period of several days for experiment DLER7-3.

Figure 8.
Calorimetric data analysis from Fig. 7, showing excess heat rate estimates including error bars. The ﬁgure depicts two separate dual-
laser trials done over the course of two days. The gray plot portions bounding each trial are heat rate without laser irradiation. Different colors
correspond to difference laser detuning frequencies. Red bars above and below the lines represent one standard deviation.

A summary of excess heat rate as a function of difference frequency for all 231 laser triggered trials across nine
cathode runs is shown in Fig. 9.

A rudimentary estimate of the average excess heat measured across all of the runs, and its uncertainty was obtained
by averaging all the data and taking as the uncertainty the standard deviation of the excess heat measured during
each laser trial. By this measure, the laser trials indicated an excess heat of 6.1 ± 21.6 mW. For comparison, the
measurements reported in [7] are also shown in Fig. 9. Both datasets provided error bars on the measurements;
however, as discussed in the methods section, the uncertainty analysis methods differ.

A histogram of the excess heat results measured at each laser triggered trial is shown in Fig. 10. We see that there
is a very slight positive heat rate measurement of about 6 mW. It is possible that this is caused by the absorption of
power from the laser trigger, although this is below the resolution of any one excess heat rate measurement.

Figures 9A and 10 show occasional observations approaching 100 mW of heat rate excess and heat rate deﬁcit. It is
worth noting that the largest magnitude heat rate observations are also those with the greatest measurement uncertainty.
This phenomenon is depicted in Fig. 11. The slope of uncertainty vs. measurement is close to unity.

3.6. Resistance ratio measurements:
Most of the attempts at resistance ratio measurements were met with experimental difﬁculty, making interpretation
difﬁcult. However, during run DLER17 the cathode was observed to achieve a resistance ratio (R/R) of 1.8, corre-
sponding to a D/Pd loading of ∼0.9.

Table 2.
Excess heat and uncertainty contributions calculated from run DLER7-3 (cathode run DLER7, data set 3).


4. Discussion

4.1. Impediments to replication:
An objective of this experiment was to faithfully replicate the DLE as practiced by Letts. Given the importance of
Letts’ claims to the low energy nuclear reactions community, we recommend an in-person collaboration with him for
those replicating his work. We estimate that it would take 2 months of his time to facilitate a deﬁnitive outcome.

It is worth noting that the DLE, if veriﬁed, represents a power source (up to 300 mW) that is approximately up to
4% of the applied electrical power (∼8 W). An effect of that scale has no immediate technological value as an energy
source, even if an inexpensive source of Pd could be found. However, the scientiﬁc value of replication would be
signiﬁcant, given that such an effect is considered highly improbable by much of the physics community.

4.2. Apparatus replication ﬁdelity:
The make and model of much of the commercially available equipment, and the mechanical drawings for custom parts,
used in our apparatus were either identical to Letts’ original apparatus or altered with Letts’ approval. We can therefore
make some claims about the performance of the apparatus, and comment on the observation differences between ours
and Letts’ original experiment.

4.3. The importance of calibration method:
A common calibration practice is to take several points from the steady state plateaus of temperature vs. power and
produce a linear ﬁt. While this approach provides a measure of calorimeter sensitivity in W/◦C [15] we submit that
this approach is inadequate for the purpose of establishing a calorimeter’s propensity for heat artifacts. As shown in
Fig. 6, a dynamic model ﬁt to all of the data from a multi-day calibration run provides a more complete indication of
the size of heat artifacts and the conditions where they occur.

Figure 9.
(A) Aggregated calorimetric data obtained for all laser triggered trials discussed in this study. Error bars are 1 sigma standard deviations.
(B) Letts’ reports of excess heat as a function of detuning [7].

Figure 10.
Histogram of all 231 laser triggered trial excess heat measurements.

Our data analysis differs in signiﬁcant ways from data analysis [16] of the original DLE, for example Eq. (1) in this
report is equivalent to the modeling of the calorimeter’s relaxation time; however, what is different is our application of
system identiﬁcation to the complete calibration dataset instead of selected portions, and the examination of residuals.
This procedure revealed myriad artifacts that one would typically address before attempting to detect excess heat,
as discussed below. As discussed in the Supplemental Information, the quality of the ﬁt using system identiﬁcation
tools did not ﬁnd support for the assumption in [7] Eq. (2) that the power applied for water splitting can simply be
subtracted from the input power. This suggests to us that heat from the recombiner is traveling into the electrolyte. 
Nevertheless, whether or not one analyzes the data using Qin(t) = icell(vcell − v0) or Qin(t) = icellvcell, this paper’s
overall conclusion regarding the observation of excess heat, and its uncertainty does not change appreciably. The
two calibration methods produce two values for the thermal conductivity, k, to the surroundings that differ by about
30%; however, due to the differential nature of this triggered experiment, this results in a simple scaling of the result
and would not cause a failure to observe excess heat were it present. The effect on the uncertainty is also scaled,
as is readily observed inspection of the terms in the uncertainty analysis. For completeness, we ran all calibrations
and analyses with Qin(t) = icell(vcell − v0); instead of an excess heat result of 6.1 ± 21.6 mW, we obtained 4.6 ±
16.2 mW.

4.4. Temperature sensing artifacts:
An important ﬁnding from the replicated apparatus is its inherent temperature sensing artifacts that produce artifactual
signatures of excess heat. Our calibrations showed that the thermal conductance out of the calorimeter is about 270
mW/◦C. We saw temperature shift artifacts that could be attributed to mechanical instability of the calorimeter cap
that ranged from 0.5 to 1.2◦C; artifacts this large correspond to heat artifacts on the order of 135–324 mW. It is worth
noting that such artifacts are on the same order or larger than the excess heat observations reported in Letts’ original
experiment. It is hard to predict whether or when spurious movements of the thermistors will occur during any given
attempt to trigger an excess heat effect; however, any credible claim of excess heat caused by an applied laser trigger
should necessarily be done on an apparatus with demonstrably stable temperature sensing. One potential way to
improve the temperature sensing stability would be to clamp the calorimeter cap in place and to ensure that all sensor
mounts are supported at multiple points.

Figure 11.
Uncertainty in excess heat rate (signed) vs. excess heat rate.

An additional potential source of spurious “excess” heat is variable recombiner function. Since the operating
temperature of the experiment spans a range of ∼40◦C and the behavior of the recombiner, as with any catalyst, should
be expected to vary signiﬁcantly with temperature, sudden exothermic bursts might be observed when recombiner
pellets activate. Considering that our analysis shows the recombiner heat to be poorly separated from the electrolyte,
care should be taken when interpreting excess heat events occurring during or shortly after major changes in cell
temperature.

Not all of the temperature sensing artifacts observed by us could be explained by motion of the cell cap. For
example, in Fig. 5, sensor 2 was observed to produce artifacts independently of sensor 1. This may be an indication
of mechanical or electrical problems affecting only sensor 2. A 1.5◦C artifact like the one shown above in Fig. 4
corresponds to a heat rate artifact of about 400 mW. With artifacts this large the calorimeter may not be well suited
for precision calorimetry. The DLE attempts to trigger an excess heat event while running the calorimeter at constant
power after a days-long phase comprising loading and plating. It was standard procedure to let the calorimeter stabilize
at constant input power before applying the laser trigger. However, this can not guarantee that heat rate artifacts will
not occur coincident with the laser trigger.

Given that the excess heat effect reported by Letts is up to a 4% effect (up to 300 mW out of 8 W), the calorimeter
used to investigate such an effect would ideally be designed and conﬁrmed to have no heat rate artifacts greater than
about 10 mW. The authors believe that this is feasible; however, it would require a careful redesign of the calorimeter.
Electrical noise on the temperature sensors might also need to be reduced.

4.5. Electrolyte temperature non-uniformity:
In one report of the DLE [17], the discrepancy between cell temperatures is said to be about 0.1◦C or less; in our
replication attempt, the discrepancy between the two cell temperature sensors was 20–30 times larger. Given the
faithful replication of the parts used in this experiment, we ﬁnd this difference noteworthy. Our observations spanning
over four months of experiments show that the replicated apparatus has temperature differences within the electrolyte
that span at least several ◦C. Neither our experiment, nor the Letts’ original experiment stirred the electrolyte.

4.6. Venting:
The original design of this experiment was vented to air through a small vent tube. The intent of this tube was to allow
gas to escape when the recombiner was not functioning properly. In the original work, the method of submerging
the exit-end of the tube in liquid was used to check for recombiner failure which would be expressed as bubbling.
A concern with this approach is that a system open to air may take up and substitute light water for heavy water.
Proton contamination, as this is called, has been raised as a possible failure mechanism because it is claimed [18] that
hydrogen will go into Pd preferentially to deuterium.

4.7. Gold plating:
In both the JCMNS 2010 as well as personal communication, Letts does not specify a particular plating time. The Cur-
rent Science publication speciﬁes plating in 10 min increments until the effect is observed. 10 min plating sequences
were utilized early on in the experimental campaign (see Table 1), however, since no effect was observed, and with
the guidance of the previous single laser work in which signiﬁcantly longer plating times were employed, sequences
as long as 14 h + were attempted. Bubbling and color change on the Au anode (from gold to red to black) over the
course of a few hours were consistently observed during the plating process.

The resulting Au deposit in the original work is characterized only by its visual appearance. We replicated the Letts
plating method which places the Pt and Au anodes in parallel with each other. A ramiﬁcation of this is that the sum,
but not the division, of current between the two anodes is unknown; this complicates our ability to know how much
Au might have been applied to the cathode by Letts, and also how much plating may be occurring in our experiments.
A suggested approach would sense current ﬂowing from both anodes.

4.8. Heat measurements:
Within the range of experimental uncertainty, the 231 excess heat measurements at each difference frequency were
consistent with no excess heat triggered by the dual-laser stimulation. While it is impossible to disprove the claims of
the Letts’ original DLE, this work does refute the claim that results are highly reproducible [8] The quantity of laser
triggered trials analyzed is 231 across 9 cathode runs, exceeding what is reported in the Letts’ original DLE [7]

One question that might arise is whether each laser trial was of sufﬁcient duration to trigger and sense an excess
heat effect. We note that each dual-laser trigger was applied for a time longer than the thermal time constant, c/k, of
the calorimeter which is about 30 min. Letts reported an excess heat response that is observed as rapidly as ∼5 min
after laser triggering [7]

While outliers of 90 mW excess or absorbed heat were observed, these measurements had the least certainty. The
excess heat measurements with the greatest certainty (smallest uncertainty) had the smallest magnitude of excess heat
rate (whether positive or negative). This trend is shown in Fig. 11. A validation of any cold fusion effect will need
to show that the measured effect persists as the uncertainty of measurements is reduced; in this work, that was not
observed.


5. Conclusions

In this work we attempted a high-ﬁdelity replication of claims of excess heat triggered by dual-laser stimulation in an
electrochemical system of palladium deuteride. We employed and described calorimeter calibration and error analysis
methods that we believe are appropriate and adequate to the experimental objective. Despite having replicated Letts’
original experimental design and protocol to the best of our ability, and conducting 231 attempts across 9 cathode runs,
we did not observe evidence of laser-triggered excess heat events on the order of 100 mW reported by Letts. The
average excess heat rate observed from all runs was 6.1 ± 21.6 mW with ∼10 W of input electrical power.

However, several issues hampered our ability to replicate the work, including limited engagement with Letts (the
author of the original DLE), the inability to directly compare material parameters of our cathodes with “successful”
cathodes, and spurious calorimetric ﬂuctuations due to apparatus design issues.

Dennis Letts claims that his results are highly reproducible [8]. We recommend that any future replication attempts
provide for direct collaboration with Letts on a redesigned experimental apparatus.


Supplemental Information

S1. Calorimeter Temperature Control Hardware:
Temperature-controlled enclosure consists of an Edgestar 84 can beverage cooler with all but the bottom-most rack
removed. Since the enclosure will only cool the system, a feedback mechanism needs to be established to provide
heating to achieve a given setpoint.

The general principle of the temperature control design is to circulate mixed (hot and cold) air from the back of the
enclosure up towards the top, down the front glass panel and then back towards the mixing area. The general schematic
is shown in Fig. 12, an interpretation of Letts’ original designs:

Two 12 V CoolerMaster SickleFlow 120’s are used. Their activation switch is a solid state relay connected to a 12
V power supply and the NI DAQ (see below). The two fans are strapped together with twist-ties. A nichrome heating
wire wrapped in a coil is connected by screws to two holes on opposite ends of the fan bank. Power for this heater is
supplied by one of the two E3632A power supplies in the setup.

The back of the enclosure showing the cold wall built into the cooler, the two 12 V fans, and (barely visible above
the fans) the heating wire is shown in Fig. 13.

The air distribution system consists of several pieces of custom-cut insulation board, with four additional 2 inch
fans guiding the air up towards the enclosure roof.

Back and angled views of the air distributor are shown in Fig. 14. The bank of fans, which sits on top of the open
portion of the air distributor in the right photo (Fig. 14) is shown in Fig. 15.

Each fan has a hole cut in the bottom (not pictured). These fans are powered on the same circuit that powers the
two larger fans along the back wall, and the entire system is left on for the duration of the measurement.

S2. Cell:
S2.1 Body:
A picture of assembled cell inside the calorimeter is shown in Fig. 16.
The cell body is a Kimble-Chase tall form Berzelius Beaker.

S2.2 Thermistor probes:
The thermistor probes are made as follows: Flint glass tubes are melted shut at one end, into which are placed thermis-
tors that have had their leads soldered onto twisted pairs taken from Ethernet cables (see this guide for a description of
the procedure). Electrical or Teﬂon tape is used to prevent the wires and solder blobs from contacting each other and
shorting the probe. Shorts are clearly noticeable during the experiment as the apparent temperature spikes to clearly
unreasonable values (hundreds of ◦C).

S2.3 Cell lid:
Designs given by Dennis Letts have been used as a starting point to fabricate the cell lid. However, it was discovered
that the slots into which the recombiner pellets are supposed to sit (lowest groove pictured above) are too thin at the
speciﬁed width of 0.0625”. When doubled, the groove allowed for a good press ﬁt.

S3. Final Washes:
The following ﬁnal sample washes were applied to the cathode before the experiment began:
DLER5:
(Not recorded),
DLER6:
Sonicated for ∼15 min in 1:1 H2O:IPA in cell body. Washed in copious amounts of distilled water,
then dried with N2. Left to dry completely overnight,
DLER7:
None (used as received from Letts),
DLER8:
Sonicated 30 min with Cole-Parmer compound remover solution, dried with N2,

Figure 12.
A schematic of the temperature-controlled enclosure.

Figure 13.
The back of the enclosure showing the cold wall built into the cooler, the two 12 V fans, and (barely visible above the fans) the heating
wire.

DLER10:
Cathode washed with acetone before start of experiment,
DLER11:
Sonicated with Cole Parmer compound remover 30 min, air-dried.

S4. Model Fitting to Calibration Data:
4.1. Linear calibration:
The calibration (Fig. 17) is typical of that obtained by ﬁtting the steady-state response of the calorimeter to the input
power at various steps. It is presented for comparison to the calibration obtained by the full system identiﬁcation
model. The inverse slope for Cell Temp1 is 0.267 W/◦C which is in close agreement with the thermal resistance
parameter from system identiﬁcation. What is missing from a ﬁt to only several plateau data points are all of the
artifacts stemming from apparatus instabilities.

As an example of dynamic model ﬁtting to calibration data, and some of the models that we tried, we illustrate
our calibration results for Cathode DLER10. Figure 18 is the full calibration dataset for input power and measured
temperatures.

Notice that the full dataset includes about 0.5 h of initial data taken before the enclosure temperature stabilized to
about 23◦C. As the calorimetry is isoperibolic, this portion of the data are excluded from the calibration. Notice also
that Cell Temperature 2 is not stable. As discussed in the manuscript, Cell Temperature 1 was used. First, we show the
result of applying the linear heat transport model
d∆T/dt = -k∆T/c +icellvcell/c.

Figure 14.
The custom-built air distributor, viewed from the back (left image) and top (right image) as viewed from the front of the enclosure.

where ∆T is the difference between Cell Temperature 1 and the Enclosure Temperature, icellvcell is the electrical
power fed into the cell, and k and c are ﬁts to the calorimeter’s thermal conductance and heat capacity respectively.
This ﬁrst model makes the assumption that power that gets converted into chemical energy by splitting water and
is then released at heat in the recombiner exits through the calorimeter through largely the same path as the rest of
the power that simply appears as direct heating of the electrodes and electrolyte. This ﬁrst model also makes the
assumption, consistent with the assumption of Letts, that heat was removed by ﬁrst order processes (conduction and
convection). Figure 19 shows the measured and modeled cell temperature difference time series. The model was ﬁt
using the Matlab System Identiﬁcation Toolbox’s grey box model routine greyest.

Figure 15.
The bank of fans, which sit on top of the open portion of the air distributor as shown in the right image in Fig. 14.

Figure 16.
A picture of assembled cell inside the calorimeter, as would be present during a typical experimental run.

Notice from Fig. 19 that this ﬁrst model underestimates the cell temperature rise for small power inputs and
overestimates the cell temperature rise for high power inputs. In spite of the model’s simplicity, it explains the data
fairly well, with a normalized root mean square error of only 4%.

S4.2 Linear calibration with subtracted electrolysis power:
Next, we apply the assumption that power that goes into electrolyzing water gets carried away by the rising bubbles in
the electrolyte, and thereafter, because the recombiner is somewhat removed from the electrolyte, that power does not
affect the cell temperature. This is the assumption adopted in the calibration used by Letts. This assumption entails a
minor modiﬁcation to the ﬁrst model, namely,
d∆T/dt = -k∆T/c +icell(vcell−v0)/c,
where v0 = 1.53 V is the thermoneutral voltage for D2O. Figure 20 shows the measured and modeled cell temperature
difference time series. As before, the model was ﬁt using the Matlab System Identiﬁcation Toolbox’s grey box model
routine greyest.

Figure 17.
A typical calibration obtained by ﬁtting the steady-state response of the calorimeter to the input power at various steps.

Figure 18.
Full calibration data set for input power and measured temperatures.

Figure 19.
Measured and modeled cell temperature difference time series using linear calibration.

We see that this model does not ﬁt the data as well as the simpler model; the ﬁt using the model that assumes that
recombiner heat escapes through the top of the cell has a normalized root mean square error of >7%, which is over 3%
worse than the simple model.

S4.3 Radiation ﬁt to calibration data:
One feature common to both of the linear models is that temperature rise is overestimated at high input power. This
suggests that heat is leaving the calorimeter via a superlinear process. Given that the calorimeter is constructed from
a transparent glass beaker it is a natural choice to add radiative heat transfer to the model to test the hypothesis that
radiation is responsible for a portion of the heat exiting the calorimeter. Next we considered the possibility that the
calorimeter dynamics are governed by the equation
d∆T/dt = −kconc∆T/c − krad(T 4
cell − T 4
surroundings) + icellvcell/c.

Figure 20.
Measured and modeled cell temperature difference time series using linear calibration with subtracted electrolysis power.

Note that the terms Tcell and Tsurroundings are in Kelvin. A more convenient way to write this expression for parameter
ﬁtting is
d∆T/dt = −kconc∆T/c-krad[(∆T + Tsurroundings)4 − T 4
surroundings] + icellvcell/c,
because this form expresses the system as a differential equation with a single state (∆T) with two inputs (icellvcell
and Tsurroundings) and three parameters (c, kcon and krad).

Figure 21 shows the measured and modeled ∆T using the nonlinear model. The ﬁtting was done using the Matlab
function nlgreyest.

The normalized root mean square error metric for this model is 0.67% which compares favorably to both of the
linear models. The table below summarizes the results of the three models used on the DLER10 calibration dataset.

Figure 21.
Measured and modeled cell temperature difference time series using the nonlinear model with thermal radiation correction.

S4.4 Summary of model ﬁtting:
By comparing the two linear ﬁts, we see that not only is the assumption that electrolysis energy escapes without
detection not well supported; but, that in addition the assumption may underestimate the heat capacity and thermal
conductance.

By comparing the kcon term of the linear and non-linear models with icellvcell input power we see an indication
that a signiﬁcant portion of the power leaving the calorimeter does so by radiation.

We chose the DLER10 dataset to illustrate comparative calorimeter models because this dataset was uncharac-
teristically free of thermometry artifacts, at least for Cell Temperature Sensor 1. One consequence of non-physical
thermometry artifacts is that nonlinear parameter estimation methods fail to converge rapidly on a global optimum.
For this reason, the calibration model used throughout this report is the linear model with icellvcell input power.


References

[1] M. Fleischmann, S. Pons and M. Hawkins, Electrochemically induced nuclear fusion of deuterium, J. Electroanal. Chem.
201(1989) 301. Errata, 263 (1990) 187.
[2] M. Fleischmann, S. Pons, M.W. Anderson, L.J. Li and M. Hawkins, Calorimetry of the palladium—deuterium–heavy water
system, J. Electroanal. Chem. 287 (1990) 293.
[3] S.E. Jones, E.P. Palmer, J.B. Czirr, D.L. Decker, G.L. Jensen, J.M. Thorne, S.F. Taylor and J. Rafelski, Observation of cold
nuclear fusion in condensed matter, Nature 338 (1989) 737.
[4] M.C.H. McKubre, S. Crouch-Baker, F.L. Tanzella, S.I. Smedley, M. Williams, S. Wing, M. Maly-Schreiber, R.C. Rocha-Fiho,
P.C. Searson, J.G. Pronko and D.A. Kohler., Development of advanced concepts for nuclear processes in deuterated metals,
TR-104195 Electric Power Research Institute: Palo Alto, 1994.
[5] M.H. Miles, R.A. Hollins, B.F. Bush, J.J. Lagowsi and R.E. Miles, Correlation of excess power and helium production during
D2O and H2O electrolysis using palladium cathodes, J. Electroanal. Chem. 346 (1993) 99.
[6] E. Castagna, M. Sansovini, S. Lecci, A. Rufoloni, F. Sarto, V. Violante, D.L. Knies, K.S. Grabowski, G.K. Hubler, M. McKubre
and F. Tanzella, Metallurgical characterization of Pd electrodes employed in calorimetric experiments under electrochemical
deuterium loading, In Proc 14th Int Conf on Condensed Matter Nuclear Science, Washington, DC, August 10-15, 2008.
[7] P.L. Hagelstein, D. Letts and D. Cravens, Terahertz difference frequency response of PdD in two-laser experiments, J. Con-
densed Matter Nucl. Sci. 3 (2010) 59–76.
[8] D Letts, Highly reproducible LENR experiments using dual laser stimulation, Current Science 108 (2015) 559–561 and Sup-
plementary Information.
[9] D.J. Nagel, Scientiﬁc and commercial overview of ICCF-19, Inﬁnite Energy, July/August 2015.
[10] P.L. Hagelstein, Current status of the theory and modelling effort based on fractionation, presented at ICCF-19, Padua, Italy,
April 13–17, 2015.
[11] D. Letts, personal communication, 2015.
[12] D. Letts and D. Cravens, Cathode fabrication methods to reproduce the Letts–Cravens effect, presented at 5th Asti Workshop
on Anomalies in Hydrogen/Deuterium loaded Metals, Asti, Italy, March 19–21 2004.
[13] http://www.ni.com/pdf/manuals/371304g.pdf
[14] ibid P.L. Hagelstein, D. Letts and D. Cravens, Terahertz difference frequency response of PdD in two-laser experiments, J.
Condensed Matter Nucl. Sci. 3 (2010) 59–76.
[15] An example linear ﬁt to steady state data is included in the Supplemental Information.
[16] P.L. Hagelstein and D.G. Letts, Analysis of some experimental data from the two-laser experiment, J. Condensed Matter Nucl.
Sci. 3 (2010) 77–92.
[17] P.L. Hagelstein and D. Letts, JCMNS 2010, Appendix A.2.1.
[18] M.C.H. McKubre, personal communication.
