Introduction

It has now been established that during electrolysis of LiOD using Pd
cathodes a threshold loading ratio of at least 0.85 needs to be achieved before excess
heat production can be expected [1]. However for emission of neutrons and tritium
and possibly charged particles and transmutation products too much lower D/Pd ratios, in the region of 0.4 to 0. 7 appears to be adequate. This has been independently
corroborated in a variety of electrolytic and gas loading experiments. It is not so much
the magnitudes of the steady state loading ratio, but rather creation of non - equilibrium conditions which facilitates rapid migration/transport of deuterons within the Pd
lattice that seems to be required. With this in view a systematic study has been undertaken using electrically self-heated 0.125 mm dia Pd wires in HJJ?2 atmospheres to
optimize the conditions under which rapid loading/unloading or H2 or D2 can be
achieved. Pd wire was of 99.9% purity and was procured from Cieco Industries,
USA.


Procedure for Loading

After a number of trial experiments the following protocol was established for optimum and rapid loading:

1. Measure initial wire resistance, namely R • of the unannealed wire.

2. Heat wire to glow hot condition in air by ohmic heating. R /R ,the ratio of resistance at glow hot condition to resistance at room temperature wciuld be -3_

3. Lower the current to < 100 mA and measure resistance in atmospheric air after
wire cools down. This is the R value to be used for further studies. This may differ
slightly from Rt 0

4. Evacuate system to -10-2mb and heat wire to red hot condition. Current for red hot
condition in vacuum would be much lower.

5. Introduce air under red hot condition of pd wire. This provides a thin oxide layer
on the wire surface.

6. Evacuate once again.

7. Introduce H2 or D2 as required when wire is red hot. It reacts with oxide layer and
activates surface. Measure resistance (R ) after cooling.

8. A loading of approximately 0.6 corres1
ponding to R /Ro - 1.7 for H2 or 1.85 for
D2 may be achieved within 2-3 minutes, provided activation of wire surface has taken
place. Loading increases further to -o.7 in another 30 minutes. For rapid loading the
wire should be as hot as possible during step No. 7. However increasing wire tempera461 
ture unduly has the risk of accidentally burning out the wire.

Some typical parameters recorded in our experiments are:

Wire diameter

Wire length

Annealed wire resistance R

Resistance at red hot condition R

Vacuum employed in chamber bet
tter than

H/D2 gas filling pressures

:0.125 mm

:~ 100 mm

:0.8 ohms

:2.5 ohms

:10-2 mb

:1-2 bars


Verification of (H(D)/Pd) Loading Ratio

On routine basis (a) Resistance Ratio [l] is used to infer the degree of
loading. However to cross check the loading value, (b) Oil manometer technique and
(c) Inert gas fusion technique were used in a few cases. All the three techniques were
found to give comparable loading values.


Summary of main Results

1. We are able to load up to a H(O)/Pd value of 0.7 both in case of H2 as well as 02
'

2. We do not find any difference in loading rate whether it is 02 or H2
.

3. Loading is fast if the gas (H2 or D2
) is introduced in the system when the wire is
brilliantly hot. Because of good conductivity of hydrogen, wire temperature automatically falls below the threshold temperature for absorption in Pd, as soon as gas enters
the chamber.

4. Since temperature at which wire gets unloaded is less in 02 (l 10°C) than in H2 (150°C), at a given filling pressure, current for deloading is lower for D2 than for H2 [31.


5. Loading rate is not particularly influenced by 1-12 or 02 gas pressure (at least in
region of few tens of mb to 4 bars, which we have studied), but it is very sensitive to
the pretreatment given to the wire.

6. Rate of unloading of a loaded Pd wire at room temperature in atmospheric air is
found to be surprisingly slow

7. If the wire surface is activated properly loading up to 0.6 or 0.7 can be attained
with 100% reproducibility.


Hysteresis Studies

To get the hysteresis curve [2], following procedure is adopted:

1. Load the wire at particular gas pressure (1 to 2 bars) to the maximum extent possible (0.7 in our case).

2. Slowly increase the current in steps. Measure the resistance at each current step
after wire temperature stabilizes.

3. At some value of current, resistance suddenly drops.

4. On increasing current further, at a particular current, wire resistance starts going
up again. In this state wire is fully unloaded.

5. To obtain hysteresis curve now slowly decrease the current; observe that resistance
starts decreasing; at some value of current resistance begins to increase. This implies
that wire has begun to load. The current at which wire starts loading in reverse part of
cycle is less than in the forward half cycle.

6. Typical hysteresis curve obtained by us is shown in Fig 1.

7. Effect of temperature on loaded Pd wire at different hydrogen gas pressures is
shown in Fig 2.


Procedure for Repeated Cycles of Loading/
Unloading

From the hysteresis curves corresponding to a given pressure select the
lower and upper "safe" current values at which absorption and desorption will be
rapid and assured. For the case of 02 gas at 1.8 bars for example the lower and upper
current values are 0. 9 amps and 1. 7 amps for loading and unloading respectively (See
Fig.1). A simple and automatic switching device can be designed which will flip the
current between these two values by shorting a precalculated resistance placed in
series with the Pd wire. Since loading takes a longer time , it is recommended that
more time be allowed in absorption mode than in desorption mode.


Applications and Conclusion

Having learnt to absorb/desorb H or 02 in a 100% reproducible and
controlled manner in Pd wire, creating non-equifibrium conditions, following experiments have been carried out/are proposed to be carried out in our centre in search of
anomalous nuclear effects:

1 Autoradiography: After loading the wire with H or 02 it was autoradiographed
using medical X - ray photographic film. Every loaaed wire is found to fog X - ray
film. Typical autoradiographs are shown in Fig 3 & 4. Even a low loading of 0.1
fogs the film. This is the phenomena of PdH luminescence first reported by our
group in 1991 l2J. Efforts to understand the cause for mechanism of fogging are
continuing.

2. Charged particle emission: Solid State Nuclear Track Detectors (SSNTD) and
surface barrier detector were employed to search for emission of charged particles if
any from PdD wires subjected to repeated cycles of loading/unloading of deuterium.
So far we have not detected any charged particles from self-heated Pd wires.

3 Tritium and neutron detection experiments are under way.


References

1. M. C. H Mckubre et al, "Isothermal flow calorimetric investigations of the 0/Pd
and H/Pd systems," J. Electroanal. Chem. ,386,55 (1994)
2. Lewis, The palladium hydrogen system, p. 118,Academic press, London,New York
(1967)
3. R.K Rout et al, "Copious low energy emissions from palladium loaded with hydrogen or deuterium, "Indian Journal of Technology, 29,571,(1991)


Fig 1. Hysteresis curve for Pd wire

Fig.2 Temperature effect on a loaded Pd wire
at different H2 gas pressures 

Fig 3. Autoracligraph of
Pd hydride wire
H/Pcl-0.65

Fig 4. Autoracliograph of
Pel hydride wire
l-1/Pd -o.6