SOME EXPERIMENTS ON THE
DECREASE OF TRITIUM
RADIOACTIVITY


Experiments claiming a sharp decrease in the radioactil'ity
of tritium incorporated in small monocr\'!italline
particles of titanium have been reported and
"are described
here in more detail. Additional evaluation provides
a high degree of evidence for the decrease in the
radioactivity of tritium. A first attempt is made to explain
this remarkable effect in terms of a "nuclear pair
hypothesis ...


I. INTRODUCTION

Since the discovery of radioactivity. many attempts
have been made to change the radioactive decay constant
11. by varying extranuclear conditions. 12 Many halfl
i fe changes. e.g .. of el ectron capture and of i n ternal
conversion. by altering the chemical environment have
been reported. In this context. experim ents with tritium
to be used for techn ological appl ications3-6 performed at
Phil ips Research Laboratories m ay be of interest. These
experiments point to a sharp decrease in the radioactivity
of tritium when tritium was incorporated into small
particles of titanium.

I n a recent l etter.7 the author gave a short description
and preliminary interpretation of the experiments as a first
attempt to explain the effect i n terms of a "nucl ear pair
hypothesis." This paper gives a more detai l ed description
and interpretation of these and additional experiments,
which resul ts in a high degree of evidence for
the strange effect of the decrease of tritium radioactivity. This treatment seems to the author to be important because
of the growing interest in the effectX-IO and because
i t faci l i tates repetition of the experi ments an d
sti mul ates further exploration. Furthermore. understandable
skepti cism 11 requires thi s more comprehensi \"e
treatment.


II. EXPERIMENTAL

Figures I and 2 show the main setups used in the
experiments. A mercury-diffusion pump with one or two
l iquid air traps was used i n the vacuum i nstallations. The
temperature of the l aboratory room was stabil i zed within
1 °C, To ensure that as many i mpurities as possi ble were
el iminated. we carefully degassed the vacuum installation,
the tube, and the evaporator at the highest possi ble
temperature. After this procedure, the pressure was -IO-h
mm of mercury. The titanium preparation was made by
evaporation of the metal i n argon at a suitable pressure.
e.g . . I to 2 cm of m ercury.3A.12-15 S pectroscopical l y pure
argon was always used. The titanium was deposited on
the inner wall of the vessel as a kind of soot. Examination
by electron microscopy showed that the preparation
consisted of extremely small particles 􀀒 IO to 20 nm in
diam eter (dependent especial l y on the argon pressure and
the evaporation rate) that were arranged in chains and
occasional l y exh ibited ramification. Electron diffraction
indicated single crystallinity of the particles. Figure .2 of
Ref. 3 and Fig. I of R ef. 4 show electron micrographs
of such preparations. After pumping out the argon. the
tritium was added and was rapid ly absorbed by the ti tanium
preparation at room temperature. A typical time constant
for the uptake of triti um into the alpha phase of
titanium was 􀀒 IO s. This has been stated in thousands of
experiments for technological applications. Our titaniu m
preparations w ere very active for the uptake of tritium at
room temperature because of their l arge surfaces. The
'He residue originating from the beta decay of the tri tium
was then removed by the vacuum pump.

In one part of the experiments. the beta electrons emitted
from the TiT, layer were measured via a cylindrical
electrode by a vibrating reed electrometer (Fig. I). The
preamplifier containing the vibrating reed was connected
to the TiT, tube by a conductor held by sapphire
supports. The negative voltage on the gold electrode
where the titanium preparation was deposited was chosen
in such a way that the I = f( U) curve was nearly
horizontal. In several other experiments, and especially
in the heating experiments described in this paper, there
was a thin nickel or steel window to enable measurement
of the X radiation accompanying the beta decay of the
tritium (internal and external bremsstrahlung and characteristic
X rays) by a Geiger-Muller (GM) tube (Figs. 2
and 3; the specifications of the GM tube were as follows:
a 19.8-mm-diam mica window, 2.5 to 3.5 mgicm2, and a
6.0- to 20-keV energy range). Of course, both experiments
gave only a relative measure of the radioactivity,
but we were especially interested in changes of the radioactive
decay constant. Furthermore, we assumed in
most experiments a "normal" emission at the beginning
when the concentration of tritium in the TiT, experiments
was very small or when the temperature in the heating
experiments was low.

The tube shown in Fig. 3 (placed in an oven 7) had a relatively large heat capacity because of the steel flanges
by which a stainless steel foil was pressed vacuum tight
between copper rings. In the tube of Fig. 2, a nickel foil
was soldered to a covar pipe; this construction resulted
in a relatively low heat capacity.D

The generation of bremsstrahlung of tritium beta electrons
was investigated by Budick et al.16 Furthermore,
characteristic X radiation of titanium and of the walls of
the tube was generated. but it was almost completely absorbed
by the metal sheets between the preparation and
the GM tube present during the experiments. If the geometry
of the TiT, preparation was unchanged, the radiation
intensity measured by the GM tube was proportional
to the total radioactivity of the tritium. The GM counting
arrangement was checked before and after each experiment
to ensure that the reading was proportional to the
radiation intensity. For future experiments. it is recommended
that modem detectors that enable determination
of the detailed X-ray spectrum be used. This will give
more information about the reliability of the measurements
and facilitate interpretation.

An analysis of the methods used to measure the radioactivity
is given in Ref. 7; this is omitted in the present
paper.

In some experiments (the heating experiments), the
evaporator consisted of a tungsten wire on which several
pieces of titanium (each 7 mg) were fixed. The loss of
titanium, mainly due to alloying with the tungsten wire,
was -15%. In other experiments (the TiT, experiments).
an improved evaporator was used, which Ref. 4 describes
in detail. The evaporator consisted of a 0.3-mmthick
tungsten core wire on which a titanium and a tungsten wire, both 0.2 mm thick. were tightly wound
side by side. This evaporator design has the big advantage
of al l owing a check to be kept on the evaporation
process; this is done by observing changes in the resistance
of the evaporator. If the evaporation power is kept
constant, one obtai ns an approximately constant evaporation
rate, and -d(l2)ldt (/ current through the evaporator)
is proportional to this rate. Then a nearly uniform
size of the titanium particles can be obtained if one uses
only that part of the evaporation process w here d(fz)ldt
is constant. The loss of titanium due to al loying w i th the
tungsten is higher w i th the i mproved evaporator than with
the first described design because of the larger tungsten
surface exposed to the molten titanium. I t is - 25%.

In the h eating experi ments, the tritium was directly
introduced i nto the titanium preparation from a small bottle
that we obtained from the supplier. Table I gives the
analysis of a typical batch of tritium

In the TiT, experiments. the tritium was first absorbed
in a pressure regulator-l and then l ed i n to the tritium
d istribution system consisting of cal ibrated vol umes.
This procedure ensured that onl y hydrogen isotopes were
added to the titanium preparation


III. HEATING EXPERIMENTS


In one technical application. triti um was used as a
priming agent for gas discharge tubes," To this end. triti
um was absorbed in a finely divided titanium preparation.
as described earlier. and then a suspension was made
by ultrason ic treatment in a suitable suspension medium,
e.g .. butyl acetate with I % nitrocell u l ose. For the application
as a pri ming agent, a smal l part of the suspension
was painted at a suitable place in the gas d ischarge tube.
For this application. the temperature stability of the TiT,
preparation was important because the gas discharge tubes
had to be baked out at temperatures of several hundred
degrees centigrade. Therefore, investigations were undertaken
to see at w hat temperature tritium would be rel
eased from a TiT, preparation with a certain concentration
c of the tritium.17


III.A. A Remarkable Heating Experiment of a TiT 0.0035
Preparation (Heating Experiment of the First Kind)


The heati ng experi ment presented in Ref. 7 is described
and evaluated in more detail in th is paper. In a
prel i minary experiment, the evaporation was accomplished
in a glass bulb with a volume of -500 em' at an
argon pressure of 2 cm of mercury. The evaporator consisted
of a tungsten coil on which eight pieces of 7 mg of
titanium. totaling 56 mg, were fixed . This resulted in a
finely d i vided titanium preparation of -48 mg, taking
into account the l oss of titanium caused by al loying with
the tungsten w ire. By adding 100 mei of tri tium. a
TiTo.(Kl3s preparation was obtained. The inaccuracy of the
triti um concentration, which is estimated at 10%, is of
no importance in the context of this and further heating
experi ments, After pumping out the 'He residue ori ginating
from the beta decay of tritium, the tube was sealed
off. Then the system was heated in an oven twi ce up to -18(FC. and the gas pressure was measured as a function
of temperature hy an ionization gauge. Extensive pumping
wa" prevemed hy switching on the ionization gauge
only during the measurements so that its effect could be
neglected. The most important results are illustrated in
Fig. 4. \\'ith the first increase of temperature. the tritium
pressure (graph B) showed no increase at temperatures
below 􀀄'" 350°C. and then the pressure increased. With
the second rise of temperature, the tritium pressure
(graph C) increased very much earlier at - 250°e. Obviously,
at the first rise of temperature, tritium atoms,
which were released from their bonds to the titanium lattice.
could not leave the titanium particles, probably
because of surface contamination (see. e.g., Peisl in
Ref. lit Vol. I, p. 63). This contamination may especially
have been caused during the introduction of the
tritium. and it would have been dissolved in the metal
during the heating up to 480°C at the first temperature
cycle.

In a most important heating experiment, a TiTo.oOJ5
preparatlon was made by the procedure described earlier
in the arrangement shown in Fig. 3 (Fig. I of Ref. 7).
The mean thickness of the titanium layer was calculated
as 0.54 mgkm:. This is nearly the range of IS.6-ke V electrons
(the maximum energy of tritium beta particles). 19
Then the system was heated in an oven, and the radioacti\'
ity was measured via the X radiation by a GM tube.
II was completely impossible to distinguish between
chemisorption at the surface and bulk absorption of the
small titanium particles. as argued in Ref. II, because
􀀪!SO titanium particles were piled up in the layer.2o Because
of the high heat capacity of the system, the rise of temperature was accomplished slowly and took several
(,􀀪 10) hours. The temperature was measured by three thermocouples
at different places of the arrangement, as
shown in Fig. 3. The tritium that was released, if any,
was pumped out continuously. The time constant of the
decrease of tritium pressure was determined for such a
vacuum system to be a few seconds (7 s for a similar
system).

In Fig. 4. graph A gives the count rate as a function
of temperature. It is very strange that the count rate decreased
sharply between 115 and 160°C by 28% followed
by a further slower decrease, reaching 60% of the
initial value at 275°C and then rising to 105% of the initial
value at 􀀜 360°e.

A constant temperature in this "valley region" corresponded
to a constant count rate established at 150 and
300°e. With a further increase of the temperature above
360°C, the count rate decreased very fast because of the
decomposition of the preparation.

The sharp decrease of the radioactivity especially between
I 15 and 160°C but also the further slower decrease
between 160 and 275°C cannot be explained by
decomposition of the TiT 0.0035 preparation. This is clearly
shown by graph B, which represents the increase of the
tritium pressure and hence the release of tritium at a first
rise of temperature: In such a preparation. there is no measurable
release of tritium below - 350°e. This statement
is confirmed by many other experiments and also excludes
the possibility of an alternative explanation that
the course of a !(T) in Fig. 4 is simulated by the diffusion
of tritium in the preparation from one place to another.
But. the strongest argument against decrease of the
radioactivity between 115 and 275°C being caused by a
release of tritium from the TiT 0.0035 preparation is the
fact that the radioactivity increases again between 275
and 360°C to approximately the initial value before decomposition
of the preparation (the 5% higher count rate
above the initial value is due to less absorption of the
X radiation owing to heating of the air between the preparation
and the GM tube, as observed in many experiments).
This definitely shows that no tritium is lost during
the first decrease of radioactivity.

Supported by the foregoing arguments, we conclude
that something strange occurs in the TiT 0.0035 preparation
during the decrease of the count rate especially between
115 and 160°C, during the further decrease up to
275°C, and during the renewed increase to approximately
the initial value between 275 and 360°e. We
argued earlier that during the whole temperature trajectory
up to 360°C, no loss of tritium occurred. Therefore,
we must conclude that the decrease of count rate was
entirely due to a decrease of tritium radioactivity. Thus,
we arrive at the following preliminary conclusion. In
the temperature region between 115 and 275°C, a new
compound of the tritium is formed in the TiT 0.0035 preparation
with a lower radioactive decay constant, and
upon a further increase of temperature and before the decomposition of the preparation above 360°C, this lower
emitting compound is destroyed.

The experiment where a TiT 0.0035 preparation was
heated and the pressure of tritium was measured shows
that at the first rise of temperature, the release of tritium
started seriously at 􀀊 3600e (graph B). This is precisely
the temperature where according to graph A. the release
of tritium began, demonstrated by the sharp decrease of
the count rate. However, in a second temperature cycle.
the release of tritium started seriously very much earlier,
in fact, at -275°e (graph e). where according to graph
A, the reincrease of the radioactivity began. In the author's
opinion, the rise of curve e is related to the release
of the tritium atoms from their bonds to the titanium lattice;
however. at the first rise of temperature. the liberated
tritium could not leave the titanium particles. as
shown by graph B. This release of the tritium atoms from
their bonds to the titanium lattice coincided with the reincrease
of the radioactivity between 275 and 360°C, as
shown by graph A. Obviously. as stated earlier. the tritium
atoms, liberated from their bonds to the titanium
lattice, which exhibited normal radioactive decay, could
not leave the small titanium particles at the first rise of
temperature, as shown by graph B. This was probably
caused by surface contamination that was removed during
the heating to 4800e at the first temperature cycle.
These observations suggest that the re-increase of the radioactivity
between 275 and 3600e and, of course, also
the decrease of the radioactivity between 115 and 275De,
and with it the destruction and formation of the hypothetical
lower emitting compound. had something to do
with the bonds of the tritium atoms to the titanium lattice.
This remark may be important for a theoretical interpretation
of the effect.


III.B. Evaluation of a Further Important Heating
Experiment (Heating Experiment
of the Second Kind)

In my recent letter7 a heating experiment is mentioned
with a ten times higher concentration of the tritium
and a faster increase of temperature, where the
decrease and re-increase of the count rate did not occur.
In the meantime, an interpretation of this experiment has
been found that does show clearly the decrease and reincrease
of radioactivity for this TiT 0.0 35 preparation during
heating.

Figure 5 shows schematically the experimental arrangement.
Two tubes with low heat capacity. according
to Fig. 2. were used. In both tubes. a preparation of
48 mg of finely divided titanium was made by evaporation
of the metal in argon of 2 cm of mercury. In tube S.
I ei of tritium was absorbed in the titanium. After removing
the 'He. which was left from the beta decay of
the tritium. valve 2 was closed. and valves I and 3 were opened. Then tube S was placed in an oven (see also
Fig. 3) and was heated slowly but about five times faster
than in the preceding experiment. The tritium. which was
released from the preparation of tube S. was absorbed by
the titanium preparation of tube G, which was left at room
temperature. The radioactivity in both tubes was determined
relatively via the X radiation by two GM tubes .

Graph S on Fig. 6a gives the count rate of tube S
(solid), and graph g gives the count rate of tube G (gas).
The count rate 5 is constant up to -·21 ODe and then decreases
steeply. At the same temperature. the increase of
the count rate g begins. This may lead to a preliminary
conclusion that the tritium is desorbed from preparation
S and that this tritium is absorbed by preparation G.

To proceed to a more complete evaluation of this experiment,
we normalize the count rate of tube G to the
same sensitivity as count rate S. Figure 6b gives the normalized
count rate G together with the count rate S. The
count rate G thus gives the radioactivity of the tritium
gas released from tube S. and 5 + G is a measure of the
total radioactivity. This count rate 5 + G is plotted in
Fig. 6b. As one can see. a similar decrease and re-increase
of the count rate takes place as in Fig. 4. The decrease
starts at a higher temperature than in the experiment described
in Sec. lILA, at 􀀉 2\ O°e, right at the beginning
of the pure alpha phase.:!1 If we attribute the decrease of
the radioactivity to only the solid preparation in tube S.
we obtain graph S'.

Most interesting is the evaluation of the decrease of
radioactivity 5 above 2\ O°e, At 230°e, 5 has decreased
by 10.6'* ([LlCRsb30 c): the increase of G. the tritiumgas
released from S. is only 0.859;' ([ .l CRu b30 c). thus.
(tJ..CRJLlCRd:>.wc = 12.5. At 242°e, the corresponding
values are [LlCRS h12c 20lft. I.lCRd2-12C 1.9'* .
and (LlCRJLlCRd2-12'c 10.5. Thus. the strong decrease
of the radioactivity 5 above 21 ODe cannot be caused by the release of tritium from the preparation. This is a
further strong argument for the decrease of tritium radioactivity
due to heating of our preparation above 21OcC.
Also very important is the fact that the re-increase of the
total radioactivity S + G begins at the same temperature
as in the experiment of Fig. 4 and ends also at -360°C.

It is particularly interesting that this experiment was
carried out under conditions quite different from those in
the experiment of Fig. 4, with a 10 times higher and variable
(decreasing) concentration. At a minimum radioactivity
of 275°C (graph S') the concentration c is -8.5
times higher than in the experiment of Fig. 4, and it decreases
strongly during the re-increase of the radioactivity.

A possible error in the foregoing interpretation could
be that the tritium released from preparation S is too slowly absorbed by preparation G, so that a certain amount
of tritium remains in the tubes as a gas. However, this is
contradicted by the statement that the finely divided titanium
preparation that is deposited in tube G absorbs
the tritium fast at room temperature (Sec. II). Furthermore,
a very strong contradiction to this objection is the
measurement at 313°C where the temperature of tube S
is kept constant during 15 min. If a measurable amount
of tritium were left as a gas, this would show up as a
measurable increase in the count rate G during the stay
at 313°C. Such behavior was not observed. To be absolutely
sure that no tritium is left as a gas in the tube. one
should place a pressure gauge in the connecting tube between
the two preparations.


IItC. Oxidized Preparations


Two other heating experiments using the experimental
setup of Fig. 3 were carried out. After preparation of
the titanium-tritium compounds. they were exposed to
ambient air, a TiT OJ)()J5 preparation for 2 h, and a TiT 0.065
preparation for 3 days, both before heating. For both preparations,
the count rate determined by a GM tube was
decreased by this procedure by - 10%. This decrease of
count rate must be due to a change in the efficiency of
the external bremsstrahlung due to absorption of this gas.
This result is important for estimating the influence of
oxygen on the efficiency of external bremsstrahlung generation:
The large changes in count rate given in graph A
of Fig. 4 and in graph S of Fig. 6 can never be caused by
the small oxygen contamination of the preparations. Furthermore,
the observations have a bearing on the interpretation
of the experiment described in Sec. IV, where
the addition of tritium caused a decrease of the total beta
emission of the preparation. With both (partially) oxidized
preparations, a distinct decrease and re-increase of
the ClJunt rate during heating was observed. as shown in
Fig. 7. However, the decrease and re-increase of the radioactivity
was not so clear, and the diminution was not
so strong as with the preparations of Figs. 4 and 6b. Furthermore,
it seems that for these oxidized preparations,
the re-increase of the radioactivity began at a somewhat
lower temperature than for the "pure" preparations. It is
most interesting that with the TiT 0.0650Z preparation
where the tritium concentration was nearly two times
higher than with the preparation of Fig. 6, no desorption
of tritium occurred before the original radioactivity was
recovered, obviously because of the strong oxide layer
on the surface of the titanium particles. But, it seems from
these experiments that oxidation of the preparation does
not stimulate the decrease of radioactivity.


111.0. Conclusions from the Heating Experiments
and Recommendations


With a more complete evaluation of our heating experiments
than in Ref. 7, I have obtained a high degree of evidence for the effect of the decrease of the radioactivity
of tritium during heating of our TiTc preparations.
Two experiments carried out under quite different
conditions showed that the maximum decrease of A occurred
at the same temperature, at 275°C, and with further
increasing temperature, the lower emitting compound
of tritium was destroyed (Figs. 4 and 6b). It appears that
two processes are in competition as a function of increasing
temperature: the formation of the lower emitting compound
(Fig. 4, graph A, 115°C < T < 275°C) and the
destruction of this compound by liberation of the tritium
atoms (nuclei) from their bonds to the titanium lattice
(Fig. 4, graphs C and A for T> 160°C). Evidently, at
275°C, equilibrium of these two processes was attained,
and with further increasing temperature, the second process
predominated. It is particularly interesting that the
relative contribution of these two processes appears to
be independent of the concentration.

Two other experiments, where the TiT, preparations
(c 0.0035 and c = 0.065) were strongly oxidized, also
distinctly showed the decrease and re-increase of the radioactivity
during heating (Fig. 7).

A most straightforward interpretation of our heating
experiments was possible applying a preparation where
the tritium was not released up to the temperature where
the initial radioactivity was restored, indicated as a heating
experiment of the first kind (Sec. lILA, Fig. 4: low
concentration, barrier at the surface of the titanium particles
that prevents desorption of the tritium). It may be a
fortuitous and fortunate circumstance that at the time of
the heating experiments, the ultrahigh vacuum (UHV 1
technique was not available. Without the surface layer
preventing the release of tritium with the experiment of
Fig. 4, only a decrease of count rate above 115°C and no
re-increase would have been observed. In this case, the
conclusion would have been that the tritium is desorbed
when the temperature is increased above 115°C The change in radioactivity during heating would not have
been noticed. Therefore, with experiments of this kind, it
is most important to apply a surface barrier, e.g" an oxide
layer, to prevent early desorption of tritium when
working with the UHV technique. The thickness of such
a layer can be precisely determined by the amount of
added oxygen. Another means to prevent early desorption
of the hydrogen isotope from the titanium would be
embedding the TiT, preparation in a nonoccluder with a
low diffusion coefficient for hydrogen. e.g., gold. But, in
any case, it is recommended that one apply a second tube
G ( Fig. 5) to determine a possible release of tritium from
preparation S.

It is particularly interesting to compare the experiment
of Fig. 4 with that of Fig. 6b. where tritium was
released from the preparation during heating, indicated
as a heating experiment of the second kind. According to
our preliminary interpretation. graph C in Fig. 4 shows
the release of the tritium atoms (nuclei) from their bonds
to the titanium lattice, but the liberated tritium atoms could
not leave the small titanium particles below -360°C
(graph B). They had normal A. and the re-increase of the
radioactivity above 275°C \vas due to these liberated tritium
atoms remaining in the preparation. In Fig. 6b. graph
G shows again the release of the tritium atoms from their
bonds to the titanium lattice. but in this experiment. the
tritium left the small titanium particles as a gas because
of the ten times higher concentration. This gaseous tritium,
too, has normal A. If we add in Fig. 6b both radioactivities.
the decreased radioactivity in the solid and the
normal radioactivity in the gas. we get graphs S + G
or S', respectively. In the experiment of Fig. 4. the addition
of these two radioacti\'ities is accomplished automatically
in graph A because the liberated tritium atoms
with normal radioactivity remained in the titanium particles.
From this evaluation. we understand the analogous
course of the radioactivities as a function of temperature
in both experiments: first. a decrease of the radioactivities
at a certain temperature. and then above :n5°C. a reincrease
to the normal radioactivity. In the experiment of
Fig. 4, we again have in the temperature region above
360°C, a return to the normal radioactivity as in Fig. 6b
because the gas released from the preparation had normal
radioactivity (we could have measured it with a second
tube Gl.

It is virtually impossible that the course of a l(n
is determined by a measurement artifact in the counting
arrangements in the experiments of Figs. 3 and 4 and
Figs. 5 and 6. If this were actually to be the case. then
one would have to assume that the efficiency of the counting
arrangement changes in such a way that the course
of a f<n results as obsened in Fig. 4. In the experiment
of Figs. 5 and 6. the efficiency of each of the two
counting arrangements would then have to change in such
a way that the observed course of S + G. which is equivalent
to the course of (/ .n n in Fig. 4. would be
produced.

The decrease of the radioactivity begins in the experiment
of Fig. 6 at a higher temperature ( - 210°C) than
in the experiment of Fig. 4 (115°C). In Fig. 6, this indicates
the beginning of the pure alpha phase.11 This observation
suggests that monocrystallinity may be a necessary
condition for the decrease of the radioactivity because
monocrystallinity is destroyed when tritium is added at
room temperature (by extremely small hydride particles)
and is regained when the preparation enters the pure alpha
phase. In the experiment of Fig. 4, the decrease of
the radioactivity also occurred in the pure alpha phase.

Of particular interest will be experiments in which
the temperature is decreased starting from the value where
the radioactivity is recovered after the decrease as in
Fig. 4 from 360°C. In our experiments, this was not done
because the only question was the temperature stability
of the preparations.

The release of tritium atoms (nuclei) from their bonds
to the titanium lattice can be prevented by maintaining
an equilibrium pressure of tritium above the preparation
(Ref. 22. pp. 336-345). indicated as a heating experiment
of the third kind. With this mode of operation, we
may expect a further decrease of the radioactivity than
was obtained in the experiments of Figs. 4 and 6. It may
be somewhat difficult to measure directly the a = J(Tt
graphs because one has to adjust continuously the equilibrium
pressure during heating to maintain a constant
concentration c. With a straightforward mode of operation,
the tritium concentration has to be slowly increased
at fixed temperatures T, and from the a = J( C)T graphs.
the most interesting a = J(T)c graphs can be determined

In the proposed isothermal experiments maintaining
an equilibrium pressure. the radioactivity is advantageously
determined by measuring the X-ray spectrum with
modern detectors. The tritium pressure above the TiT,.
preparation and the contribution of this tritium to the
X-ray intensity has to be carefully measured

Until now, in all heating experiments, the formation
of the lower emitting compound occurred in the alpha
phase of TiT,. (Ref. 21 ). It is extremely interesting to perform
heating experiments also with a high tritium concentration.
with hydride-phase TiTc. Such experiments
are advantageously accomplished applying an equilibrium
pressure as described earlier.

For a theoretical interpretation of the effect, it may
be important that the tritium atoms (nuclei) be bound as
harmonic oscillators in the titanium lattice.23.24

From the course of a = J(T) (Fig. 4), we can determine
the concentration of tritium with normal A and that
of the "compound" with decreased A. These concentrations
as a function of temperature follow the well-known
laws of chemical equilibrium. A detailed discussion of
the related thermodynamical functions that also presupposes
careful determination of disturbing effects [e.g., release
of the tritium atoms (nuclei) from their bonds to
the titanium lattice] may lead to a deeper understanding
of the decrease of tritium radioactivity.


IV. TiT" EXPERIMENTS

Through our heating experiments, we arrived at the
preliminary conclusion that under certain conditions-in
our case. by heating TiT,. preparations (with c = 0.0035.
0.035. and 0.065 i-a new compound of the tritium in
the small titanium particles with lower A is formed. However,
there is no physical effect known that accomplishes
the observed decrease of radioactivity. Therefore, further
experiments must be performed to search for an explanation
of the observed effect.

It was speculated that the decrease of the tritium radioactivity
in the small titanium particles may have something
to do with the different phases of the TiTc system,
a suspicion that so far has not been confirmed. Therefore,
experiments were undertaken to measure the radioactivity
a as a function of the concentration c in such
systems. The concentration c was taken as independent
variable x, and the related experiments are therefore indicated
as TiT, experiments. It would be very interesting
to do such experiments at different temperatures (see Sec.
III.D), but until now, only TiT x experiments at room temperature
have been done. All TiT x experiments are performed
using the tube shown in Fig. I.  

In all TiT, experiments, a substantial deviation from
the expected proportionality between radioactivity and
concentration x was observed. The lJ.a1tu is not constant
with increasing concentration x but shows characteristic
variations.

In the most important TiT, experiment,7 4.92 mg of
titanium was evaporated in argon at a pressure of I cm
mercury. After removal of the evaporator, the titanium
left on it was determined quantitatively as 1.33 mg. Thus,
the titanium soot layer contained 3.6 mg of titanium. The
mean thickness of the titanium layer was calculated as
l.l5 X 10-2 mglcm2 (25 nm). According to the energyrange
relation of electrons, 19 there could be no essential
absorption effect of the beta electrons of tritium. The particle
size was 􀀁 16 nm. After preparation of the titanium
soot layer, the system was sealed off.

Small glass bottles with volumes of 2 and 4 cm3 were
filled with tritium at a gas pressure of 7.5 X 10 - 3 mm
mercury via a hydrogen pressure regulator:' These little
bottles were sealed to the vacuum system, and the tntium
was introduced by opening a breaking seal. By addition
of one bottle of 2 cm3, the increase of the concentration
was tu = 2.2 X 10-5. To exclude a possible influence of
the sequence of the preparation of the bottles, we applied
the bottles at random. The beta electrons emitted from
the TiT, layer were measured via a cylindrical electrode
inside the vessel by a vibrating reed electrometer. This
electrometer allowed the total current to be electronically
compensated after each measurement to zero, so
that the following lJ.i 'X lJ.a could be determined accurately.
By recording the tritium pressure using a special
tube that measures the beta emission of the gaseous tritium,
we ascertained that the tritium had been absorbed completely after each addition. A time constant of 􀀐 l O s
for the uptake of tritium ensured that the loading occurred
uniformly.

Figure 8 gives the results of the experiment. The first
value of t:.altu was taken as 100%. The experiment took
several weeks. The t:.al tu decreased first, reaching a
min i mum of 􀅯55% of the initial value at x"'" 3 X 10-4•
A fter reaching the min i mum, t:.altu i ncreased agai n and
reached the initi al value at x = 4.5 x 10-4• Then t:.altu
decreases again and reached -85% of the initial value at
x = 1.3 X 10-3• This i s the same value as was obtained
in two other i ndependent experiments.

From the course of t:.alt:.x = f(x) reaching a minimum
and i ncreasing again to the initial value, a nuclear
pair hypothesis was derived as follows. Two tritium nuclei
(identical nuclei with half i n teger spin) under certain
condi tions (i n our case, by embedding i n small
monocrystalIine particles of tit an i u m) arrange themselves
in a pair with nuclear spin zero. Such a nuclear
pair acts for the decay to a certain extent as the parent
nucleus, so that the radioactive decay changes to a certain
extent i nto a higher forbidden one.

The author would l ike to emphasize that the nuclear
pair hypothesis i s a hypothesis. Thi s i mplies that i t i s a
first attempt to explain the strange effect of the decrease
of tritium radioactivity. It is to be proved or d isproved by
further experiments, and if this hypothesis cannot be confirmed,
we must search for another explanation of the
effect. Furthermore, nothing has yet been said about the
nature of the hypothetical nuclear pairs. a

Pairing of atomic nuclei could be demonstrated by
nuclear spin resonance. Also, scattering experiments with
polarized neutrons might be i nteresting.

ccording to the theory of beta decay. the transformation
of the decay to a higher forbidden one has remarkable
consequences: The maxi mum of the energy
spectrum and the mean energy must be shifted to higher
energies. To be sure about this i nteresting fundamental
effect, one must perform an ionization chamber, or hetter
still, a proportional counter-type experiment.

The foregoing derivation of the nuclear pair hypothesis
presupposed that the tritium nuclei are uniformly incorporated
into the domains where pair formation takes
place. If we assume random incorporation and that the
nuclear pair hypothesis is true, we reach by elementary
mathematics the following expression:

With random i ncorporation, t:.a/􀀏 decreases exponentially
with increasing concentration x to the lower
value of the decay constant. This was i ndicated in our
experiment where 􀀐al tu was decreased at x = 13 X ) 0 -.!
to 􀅰85% of the initial value ( not shown in Fig. 3 of
Ref. 7). Random incorporation i nstead of uniform incorporation
was probably caused by increasin g impurities
at the surface of the titanium particles duri ng the course
of the experiment so that thermodynamical equilihri um
with an equal concentration of tritium in the ti tanium particles
could not be attained.

There have been several other TiT, experiments with
interesting results. However, i n these experiments. which were cIa rried out before the experiment just described.
the evaporator was not removed and could have absorbed
some tritium.

In two independent TiT, experiments. small additions
of tritium of approximately the same amount as in
the preceding experiment were added from a calibrated
volume to preparations of 3.6 mg of titanium. The minimum
of ..lal.lx shown in Fig. 8 was not observed. The
.lal..lx decreased (ex ponentially) in both experiments and
reached -80ge of the initial value at x = 2.3 x I O-􀀤.
Obviously. we had the condition for random incorporation
of the tritium atoms into the titanium particles as
argued earlier. At x = 1.3 x I O-􀀥. we had the same value
of ..lal.l.t as found in the preceding experiment. With further
additions of tritium . ..lal.l.t decreased very sharply
to - I £,t of the initial value at x = 2.3 X 10-3• This suggests
that the decrease of the radioactivity was very sharp
in the hydrid phase. But. this conclusion should be taken
provisionally with extreme caution because the evaporator
might have absorbed some tritium. It would be very
interesting to repeat these experiments removing the evaporator
and applying UHV conditions until the preparation
is completely saturated.

During the two experiments just described, several
very strange events were observed. The addition of tritium
caused a decrease of the total beta emission of the
preparation (..lal..lx < 0). This always occurred after an
increase of the electron emission of the preparation during
a longer period (one or several days) whereby the
preparation was left on the vacuum installation or after
addition of a small amount of oxygen. Figure 9 presents
the results of such an experiment. The tritium concentration was x 3.7 X 10-3, and the tritium addition
was dx = 6 x 10-5; PT gives the tritium pressure as a
function of time. measured with a special tube. The slow
absorption of the tritium was caused by surface contamination
of the preparation. After 30 min. practically all
the tritium was absorbed by the preparation; < I % was
left. The dUE is the signal of the TiT< tube (Fig. I) corrected
for the beta emission of the gaseous tritium and
for the ionization of the neutral gas during the period
where the valve to the vacuum pump was closed. The
dUE is proportional to da, dx is obtained from PT and
da begins to decrease immediately from zero after the
addition of tritium. It is striking that da and da/dx decreased
further with time when all the tritium was absorbed.
The total decrease of the emission was -20% of
the normal increase, which had to be observed with the
addition of tritium. Also, the next addition of tritium resulted
in a decrease of the total emission (da/dx < 0),
but the decrease was smaller, only one-fourth of that of
the preceding addition.

By careful evaluation of the experiments with da/
dx < 0 applying the formalism of random incorporation,
we arrive at the conclusion that the decrease of the
total electron emission can be explained by the nuclear
pair hypothesis. To get a decrease of the total emission,
A2 must be in any case «0.5 X A I' This stresses the conclusion
that in the two experiments described earlier, AT
was decreased very sharply in the hydrid phase

In his opposing note, Wicke I
I
argued that the course
of daldx f(x) shown in Fig. 3 of Ref. 7 was caused by
oxidation of the titanium surface followed by reduction
by the added tritium. The formed T 20 would then desorb from the titanium surface and migrate to the glass wal l
and thus be lost for current determi nation by the electrometer
device. This argument can of course also be app
lied to the experiments with il.alil.x < O. However, one
must realize that the enthalpy of formation of I mol of
titanium oxide is nearly two times that of 2 mol of water.
But, i n any case, if the most i nteresting TiT. experiment
with il.alil.x < 0 were to be repeated, additional means
would have to be applied to determine any T 20 possibly
desorbed from the preparation.


V. CONCLUDING REMARKS

As mentioned in Ref. 7. the decrease of tritium radioactivity
may have a bearing on the cold deuteriumdeuterium
( D-D) fusion effect. 25 For the present, we have
two different effects: cold D-D fusion and a decrease of
tritium radioactivity. However. there i s a strong suspicion
that the same or a related fundamental principle underlies
both effects: Atoms (nuclei) of hydrogen i sotopes
are bound in suitable metals. and nuclear properties are
changed in a manner not understandable. Cold D-D fusion
experiments w ith deuterium absorbed in finely d i v
ided preparations of h ydrogen absorbers (titan i um ,
palladium. o r others) a s used i n our tri ti um experiments
are proposed. The determination of the intensity of cold
D-D fusion as a function of temperature may enable a
thermodynamical treatment ( see Sec. III.D). This may be
a way to arrive at a deeper understanding of the phenomenon.

The fact that sometimes cold D-D fusion experiments
with a positive result are not reproducible points
to the existence of an underlying hidden necessary condition.
For the decrease of tritium radioactivity, such a
necessary condition may be monocrystallinity of the small
titanium particles. Monocrystalli nity is a most striking
property of our preparations. This may be important for
the theory of the effect because such a monocrystalline
particle i s one quantum mechanical system. Whether a
decrease of tri ti um radioactivity also occurs with nonmonocrystalline
particle should be investigated. In experiments
with copper done for nuclear magnetic resonance
i nvestigations, such nonmonocrystalline particles were
prepared by evaporation of the metal at a higher argon
pressure.

In this connection, it may be i nteresting that in the
cold fusion experiment done by Fleischmann and Pons.26
where excess enthalpy was clearly observed, analogous
conditions for the formation of small pallad ium-hydride
particles existed. as was the case for the formation of
our small titani um particles prepared by gas evaporation.
I ncreasing the concentration of deuterium above the
end of the alpha phase ( Pd D 􀄹 O Ol )' obtains supersaturation
of the alpha phase, w hich results i n homogeneous
nucleation. 􀀞7 This brings about small monocrystalline particles
of palladium deuteride ( Pd D , o o)' Obtain i ng ho-mogeneous nucleation requires very pure palladium metal,
which is a condition that is also necessary for the production
of excess enthalpy as reported by Fleischmann
and Pons.26 Otherwise, one obtains i nhomogeneous nucleation
with the formation of bigger and non monocrystalline
deuteride particles. I t i s suggested t hat the
microstructure and possible monocrystallinity of the pall
ad i um deuteride suspended i n the palladium matrix
should be i nvestigated by metal lographic tech n iques
( Ref. 22, p. 353 ) at different states of saturation. 

With both effects. cold D- D fusion and a decrease of
tritium radioactivity, identical particles i nteract. Cold D-D
fusion gives the possibility of checking if such interactions
are possible only between identical particles ( in dicated
a s homointeractions) or also between nonidentical
particles (indicated as heterointeractions ). If one gets neutron
production in a cold fusion experiment by the D-D
reaction, one must repeat the experiment with a m i xture
of 50% deuterium and 50% tritium. If we have heterointeraction,
one must then observe a h igh i ntensity of
1 4-MeV neutrons from the deuterium-tritium ( D-T ) reaction.
The result of such an experiment i s very i mportant
for the theoretical i nterpretation of the cold fusion
effect. If the reaction occurs only between identical particles,
many theories are ruled out 

Also, the e ffect of decrease of tritium radioactiv ity
may offer a means to dist inguish between homo- and heterointeractions.
If a heating experiment is performed with
a distinct result, one must repeat the experiment with the
addition of an amount of hydrogen and at another time
with an amount of deuteri um both equal to the amount of
the added tri tium. If a heterointeraction takes place, the
course of a = f(T) would be entirely different from that
observed with p ure tri tium.


REFERENCfS

. G. T. EMERY, "Perturbation of Nuclear Decay Rale􀃈." Anll.
Rev. Nucl. Sci., 22, 1 65 ( 1 972 ) .
2. M . S . F REEDMAN. "Atomic Structure Effecb I n N uc lear
Events." Ann. Rev. Nile/. Sci .. 24. 209 \ 1 974 1.
3 . O . REIFENSC HWE I LE R. "A Suitable Tritium Carrier for
Gas Discharge Tube􀃉:' Proc. COIlf. Peau:/u! Uses AlOmic EII ergy.
Geneva. S witzerland. 1 95 8 . Vol. 1 9. p . 360. u nited Nations
( 1 95 8 ) .
I
4. O. REIFENSCHWEILER. "Hydrogen Pressure Regulator
with High Absorption Rate," Rev. Sci. Instrum . . 35. 456 ( 1 964 ) .
5 . O . REIFENSCHWEILER. "Sealed-Off Neutron Tube : The
Underlying Research Work." Philips Res. Rep .. 16, 40 I ( 1 96 1 ) .
6. O. REIFENSCHWEILER. "The Generation of High Neutron
Yields with Sealed-Off Neutron Tubes," Proc. 1st Symp.
Neutron Dosimetry in Biology and Medicine, Neuherbergl
Miinchen, Germany, May 1 5- 1 9. 1 972, p. 8 2 1 , EUR 4896 d-f-e.
7. O. REIFENSCHWEILER, "Reduced Radioactivity of Trihum
in S m a l l Titanium Particles," Phys. Lett. A, 184. 1 49
( 1 994).
8 . W. BOWN. "Ancient Experiment Turns Heat Up on Cold
Fusion," New Sci. , 141. 1907. 1 6 ( 1 994).
9. C. TINSLEY, 'The Solid State A l ters Nuclear B e h aviour,"
Cold Fusion, I, 1 8 ( 1 994 ) .
1 0. D. LENSTRA, "Pleidooi," Ned. Tijdschr. Natuurkd . . 60,
1 0 ( 1 994 ).
1 1 . E . WICKE, "No Decelerated f3-Decay of Tritium Solved
in Titanium," Z. Naturforsch .. 49a. 1 25 9 ( 1 994).
1 2 . K. KIMOTO, Y. KAMIYA , M. NONOYA M A , and R.
UYEDA, "An Electron Microscope Study on Fine Metal Particles
Prepared by E vaporation in Argon Gas at Low Pressure,"
lap. l. Appl. Phys. , 2, 7 0 2 ( 1 963).
1 3 . K. K IMOTO and 1. N IS HIDA, "An E lectron M icroscope
and Electron D i ffraction Study of Fine Smoke Particles Prepared
by Evaporation in Argon Gas at Low Pressures," lpn. l.
Appl. Phys. , 6, 1 047 ( 1 96 7 ) .
1 4 . H . HOERSTER. H. LYDTlN. O. REIFENSCHWEILER,
and K. G. FROE H N E R . "B i ldung und Transport k l e i ner
Teilchen bei Verdampfungsvorgangen i n Gegenwart von Inertgasen."
Z. Angew. Phys .. 22, 203 ( 1 967 ).
1 5 . A. R. THOELEN "Contribution of C luster Physics to Material
Science and Technology:' NATO ASI Series, p. 60 1 , J.
DAVENAS and P. M. RABETIE, Ed., North Atlantic Treaty
Organization ( 1 986).
1 6. B . BUDIC K, J. CHEN, and H . LIN, "Bremsstrahlung from
Tritium f3-Decay," Phys. Rev. C. 46, 1 267 ( 1 99 2 ) .
1 7 . 1. F. VAN DE VATE, O. REIFENSCHWEILER, and G.
VAN DE LIGT. "Onderzoekingen naar de Temperatuurvastheid
van fij nverdeelde Metaal-Tritium-Systemen in Vacuum."
I nternal Report of the Phi lips Research Laboratories ( 1 96 1 ) (in
Dutc h ) (unpublished ).
1 8 . H.vdrogen in Metals, Topics in Applied Physics, Vols. I and
II. p. 2 8 , G. ALEFELD and J. VOELKL. Eds .. Springer, Berl
i n , Heidelberg, and New York ( 1 97 8 ) .
1 9. J. E . HOLLIDAY and E . J . STERNGLASS, "New Method
for Range Measurements of Low-Energy E lectrons in Solids."
l. Appl. Phys .. 30, 1 42 8 ( 1 959).
20. O. REIFENSCHWEILER. "Decelerated f3-Decay of Tritium
Solved in Titanium," Z. Naturforsch. , 50a, 973 ( 1 995).
2 1 . N. A . GALAKTIONOWA. Hydrogen-Metal Systems Databook,
Ordentlich Publishers, Holon. Israel .
2 2 . Metal Hydrides, W. M . MUELLER. J. P. BLACKLEDGE,
and G. G. LIBOWITZ, Eds., Academic Press, New York and
London ( 1 968).
2 3 . R. HEMPELMANN, D. RICHTER, and B. STRITZKER,
"Optic Phonon Modes and Superconduct i vity i n a-Phase
( Ti, Zr)-( H 1 D) A lloys," l. Phys. F, 12, 79 ( 1 982).
24. R. KHODA-BA KHSH and D. K. ROSS, "Determination
of the Hydrogen Site Occupation in the a Phase of Zirconium
Hydride and in the a and f3 Phases of Titanium Hydride by
Inelastic Neutron Scattering," l. Phys. F, 12, 1 5 ( 1 982).
25. M. FLEISCHMANN and S. PONS, "Electrochemically Induced
Nuclear Fusion of Deuterium," l. Electroanal. Chem. ,
261 , 30 I ( 1 989).
26. M. FLEISCHMANN and S. PONS, "Calorimetry of the
Pd-D20 System: From Simplicity via Complications to Simplicity,"
Phys. Lett. A , 176, 1 1 8 ( 1 993).
27. J. P. H IRTH and G. M. POUND. "Condensation and Evaporation,
Nucleation and Growth K i netics," Progress in Materials
Science, Vol. I I , Pergamon Press, New York ( 1 96 3 ) .