1. Introduction
When cold fusion was announced byMartin Fleischmann and Stanley Pons in 1989, it seemed possible that the needs of
humankind for inexpensive, clean and inexhaustible energy would be met for the foreseeable future [1], [2]. However,
for a variety of reasons related to politics in society and within science, cold fusion (now often referred to as low energy
nuclear reactions, LENR) was rejected by mainstream science. Consequently, the potential energy benefits of LENR
were not rigorously pursued as a top priority. Nevertheless, a significant number of reputable scientists worldwide
continued research in the phenomenon at the margins of mainstream science. Cold fusion did not die out like other
rejected scientific claims. The principal issues of the field continue to be adequate reproducibility and an acceptable
explanation, which is not uncommon for scientific discoveries.

Many of the LENR researchers began their work in the early months and years after the 1989 announcement.
Because of its pariah status in the scientific world, few new investigators were attracted to the field. The determined
researchers who continued have developed a large body of evidence for the reality of the phenomenon so that LENR
may yet fulﬁll its promise as a major new source of energy. But now more than 30 years after the announcement, many
of these investigators are leaving the ﬁeld because of retirement, health issues and death.

The loss of their research records would be a tragedy not only for the LENR ﬁeld, but also for all of humankind,
given the continued promise of LENR as an energy source. The LENR Research Documentation Initiative (LRDI) is
underway at LENRGY, LCC [3] to help mitigate the loss of these records. Its objectives are to preserve the records
while they are still available and protect the information for future analysis as more understanding of LENR is gained.


2. Methods

The procedure of the LRDI [4] is straightforward (Figure 1). The collected records are supplemented with recorded
interviews, and a research timeline is prepared. Arrangements are made for records preservation, and draft and ﬁnal
reports are prepared. Opportunities for additional work are normally included in the report and are pursued in a
subsequent phase in many cases. In most projects, one or more site visits are made to gather information and conduct
the recorded interviews. As progress is made, the components of the record are described in a series of memos. The
collection of memos then serves as the basis for the project report.

Figure 1.
LRDI Procedure.


3. Projects and Participants

The LRDI has been privileged to engage some of the longest-standing and most prominent investigators in the LENR
ﬁeld. More than 20 projects are underway or have been performed under the umbrella of the LRDI [5], beginning with
a pilot project with Dr. Edmund Storms [6]. The projects have included more than 25 participants and collaborators.
They are listed in Table 1 generally in order of participation in the LRDI.

The methods of LRDI projects described above were mostly developed in a pilot project with Dr. Ed Storms
and have been reﬁned in subsequent projects. Given the thoroughness of his investigations and his comprehensive
records, Dr. Storms proved to be a nearly ideal candidate for the pilot project. He is retired from Los Alamos National

Table 1.
LRDI Participants and Collaborators

Laboratory and has been a foremost LENR researcher going back to the 1989 announcement. He has written two
books on the subject [7], [8]. He received the Preparata Medal, one of the most prestigious in the ﬁeld, in 2005. Eight
phases of his cold fusion work were identiﬁed in the Storms LENR Research Documentation Project. The results of
the pilot project were presented as a poster at ICCF-21 in 2018 [9], and other LRDI projects followed soon afterward.


4. Project Components

As might be expected, the types and amounts of available research records are unique for each LRDI participant. In
many cases, a LENR laboratory is available and is documented, including the experimental methods and equipment
utilized. Typical project components are papers, presentations and unpublished reports, lab notebooks, and other
hardcopy and the electronic ﬁles. Most participants have a library of LENR-relevent books, magazines and papers,
often including proceedings of the International Conferences on Cold Fusion (ICCFs), as well as recorded media, such
as DVD tapes and CDs. As noted above, a memo is prepared describing each component.


5. Future Project Opportunities

In many LRDI projects, more information is identiﬁed than can be included in the ﬁrst set of memos and the initial
report. These opportunities are noted in the report. For some participants, more work – including more site visits – is
performed, and additional versions of the report are prepared.


6. Outreach

Several measures have been taken to “get the word out” on the LRDI and its objectives and methods. After the Storms
pilot project was presented as an ICCF-21 poster in 2018, a presentation on methods and participants was made at
the MIT CF/LANR workshop in early 2019 [10]. A comprehensive article appeared in Inﬁnite Energy magazine
in 2020 [11]. LRDI updates have been provided at ICCF-22 in 2019 [12], ICCF-23 in 2021 [13] and ICCF-24 in
2022 [14]. A 2022 paper has also been published in the JCMNS [15] on the LENR career of Dr. Mahadeva Srinivasan,
one of the earliest and most productive researchers in the ﬁeld. That paper is derived from the Srinivasan LENR
Research Documentation Project, for which a report [16] had been prepared in 2020, not long before his death.


7. Why Must the Loss of LENR Research Records Be Mitigated?


Documentation and preservation of LENR research is important both to the ﬁeld speciﬁcally and to humankind more
generally. The cumulative body of the LENR research records provides ample evidence of the reality of the phe-
nomenon. This evidence in turn establishes the basis for ﬁnancial support of the ﬁeld for conducting experiments and
developing an explanation. The records manifest the depth, breadth and quality of the work done in the ﬁeld, which
demonstrates the credibility of the participants.

The case for cold fusion is strengthened by recording as much of the evidence for its existence as possible. As more
understanding of the phenomenon is gained, these previous records may be re-analyzed to help address the primary
issues of insufﬁcient reproducibility and inadequate explanation.

The beneﬁt of lessons learned in the cold fusion case is another reason for careful documentation of past research.
Given LENR’s potential energy beneﬁts, the obvious question of why it was rejected within a short time after it was
announced demands better answers. Answers to this question may provide guidance on how to deal more constructively
with revolutionary scientiﬁc claims in the future and protect the interests of humankind.

To the extent that it is able to displace current energy sources like fossil fuels and nuclear power, LENR will go far
in ensuring the long-term habitability of the earth. The need of humankind for unlimited, cheap and clean sources of
energy can hardly be overstated. Measures like documentation and preservation of the records will help LENR meet
this urgent need and must be undertaken to enhance the long-term prospects of humanity.

The LENR research records must also be documented and preserved for proper recognition of the investigators
who have pursued it in the face of rejection, and even ridicule, from the scientiﬁc establishment. Many of them have
persisted despite damage to their professional careers as they pursued the phenomenon both for the advancement of
science and for possible ﬁnancial gain. Particularly if and when the potential cold fusion beneﬁts are ﬁnally realized,
these determined pioneers in this new scientiﬁc ﬁeld will deserve the recognition and gratitude of all of humanity.


8. Where to from Here?

An integrated report that includes a chapter for each LRDI participant is underway. Provision is made for review of
each chapter by its participant (if available) in order to meet conﬁdentiality provisions of the initiative. At the same
time, more participants may be added, and more work on previous projects may be undertaken as identiﬁed in the future
opportunities section of the reports. Solutions are being evaluated for a central repository for the LRDI information to
ensure both adequate security and easy access by the participants.


References

Lemonick, M., 1989. Fusion Illusion? Two Obscure Chemists Stir Up a Fascinating Controversy in the Lab, but New Tests
Challenge Their Hopes of Creating Limitless Energy. Time Magazine, May 8.
Begley, S., 1989. The Race for Fusion. Newsweek Magazine, May 8.
LENRGY, LLC. lenrgyllc.com
Grimshaw, T., 2019. Collection, Organization and Documentation of LENR Research Results: Guideline. Unpublished
Report. January.
Grimshaw, T., 2022. LENR Research Documentation Initiative: Status Report and Future Directions, Update 4. Unpublished
Report. Update of February 2021 (Update 4) in Preparation.
T. W. Grimshaw / Journal of Condensed Matter Nuclear Science 36 (2022) 25–29
Grimshaw, T. and E. Storms, 2018, Documentation of Dr. Edmund Storms’ 29 Years of Cold Fusion Research - Experi-
ments, Explanations, and Related Scientiﬁc Contributions: Energy Institute, University of Texas, Unpublished Draft Summary
Report.
Storms, E.K., 2007. The Science of Low Energy Nuclear Reaction: A Comprehensive Compilation of Evidence and
Explanations about Cold Fusion: Singapore, World Scientiﬁc Publishing.
Storms, E.K., 2014. The Explanation of Low Energy Nuclear Reaction: an Examination of the Relationship Between Obser-
vation and Explanation. Concord, NH. In?nite Energy Press.
Grimshaw, T., and E. Storms. 2018. Documentation of Dr. Ed Storms’ 29-Year LENR Research Career. Poster for
21st International Conference on Cold Fusion (ICCF-21), Fort Collins, Colorado. June.
[10] Grimshaw, T., 2019. LENR Research Documentation Initiative: Objectives, Procedure, Participants, Future Opportunities.
Presentation
and
Poster
at
CF/LANR
Colloquium
at
MIT,
Cambridge,
MA.
March.
https://theworld.com/?mica/2019colloq.html
[11] Grimshaw, T., 2020. Documenting Cold Fusion Research: Preserving a Vital Asset for Humankind. Inﬁnite Energy, Issue 150,
March/April.
[12] Grimshaw, T., 2019. LENR Research Documentation Initiative: Progress in Methods and Participants. Presentation and Poster
at 22nd International Conference on Cold Fusion (ICCF-22), Assisi, Italy. September. https://iscmns.org/iccf22/
[13] Grimshaw, T., 2021. Mitigating the Loss of Irreplaceable LENR Research Records: Initiative Update. Virtual Poster Presen-
tation at 23rd International Conference on Cold Fusion (ICCF-23), Xiamen, China, June. http://ikkem.com/iccf-23.php
[14] Grimshaw, T., 2022. LENR Research Documentation: What Have We Learned So Far? Presentation and Poster at 24th
International Conference on Cold Fusion (ICCF-24), Mountain View, California, July. https://www.iccf24.org/
[15] Grimshaw, T., 2022. Dr. Mahadeva Srinivasan: Research Pioneer in the LENR Field. Jour. Condensed Matter Nuclear Science.
Vol. 35, p. 21-29.
[16] Srinivasan, M., and T. Grimshaw, 2020. Documentation of Dr. Mahadeva Srinivasan’s Cold Fusion Research. LENRGY
Unpublished Report. Volume 1, Third Draft Report, June. Volume 2, Collection of Papers and Related Documents, June 2018.
[17] Anthropocene Institute. https://www.anthropoceneinstitute.com/
