1. Introduction

The past three and a half years has seen a considerable number of reports
of observations of anomalies in metal deuteride systems; reports of the various and
diverse effects can be found in the pages of this conference proceeding. We may
summarize some of the effects currently being claimed:
1. Reproducible excess power generation in palladium electrolysis experiments carried
out in a basic (LiOD) heavy water electrolye. The excess power has been
reported at levels as high as 10 times the electrical JV input power. The observed
excess energy at many laboratories exceeds 50 MJ / mole ( 500 e V /atom)
of Pd, and can therefore not be accounted for by chemistry; it is of nuclear
origin.
2. Anomalous neutron emission in electrolytic and gas-loaded metal deuterides.
3. Anomalous excess tritium production, unaccompanied by commensurate neutron
production.
4. Fast anomalous fast ion emission from metal deuterides.
5. Anomalous gamma emission from metals involved in electrolytic and gas-loading
deuterium experiments.
6. Claimed production of 4He.
7. Excess power generation in light water experiments involving nickel cathodes and
K2CO3 electrolyte.

The experimental evidence in support of the various claims varies in quantity 
and quality. I regard the evidence in support of the excess power production in heavy 
water experiments to be sufficiently strong that it could be conservatively accepted 
as experimental fact at this point. The evidence for 4He production, for example, is
interesting; but it would be useful to obtain more confirmation to be certain that the 
effect is indeed what has been claimed. 

There has been very little in the way of significant technical input from skep­
tics during the past several years. The principal criticisms which one hears repeated 
involve either that (1) the experiments are not done by competent experimentalists; 
or that (2) there is no effect, it is all noise; or finally that (3) if the heat is nuclear, 
then there must be commensurate neutron emission - since there is not, then the 
heat is of some other origin. 

We recognize the first as an ad hominum attack which is in of itself devoid of 
technical content; if true, it would make the more relevant job of technical criticism 
easier. The second is an argument which was used effectively in 1989; but is not so 
convincing in 1992. Some of the SRI excess power measurements exceed 50 a; Pons 
and Fleischmann point out that a watch and a knowledge of the heat of vaporization 
of water as it is vigorously boiled away is sufficient to verify that the excess power 
production is ten times the input IV electrical power in their experiments. 

The third argument is more insidious, since it presupposes the conclusion. If 
one rejects the possibility of a new physical nuclear reaction mechanism, then one is 
forced to the conclusion stated. Having rejected the experimental results, there is no 
motivation to consider possible new reaction mechanisms. A tight and self-consistent 
argument, it is one which has generally been adopted by the physics community; it 
is also an argument which seems to require a fully-developed theory to refute. This 
argument is one which is probably most responsible for the antagonism on the part of 
the physics community in the US, and ultimately is responsible for nearly complete 
absence of research support in the US in the field. 

Our point of view in the work described in this manuscript is that we accept 
the experimental claims to the degree merited by the evidence, and seek possible 
theoretical explanations. It should be noted that actually doing so entails very signif­
icant non-technical hardships, as we have found from experience; this course of action· 
is not recommended for others. 


2. Fusion Reactions

Nuclear fusion requires that two nuclei approach each other to within range to 
interact, typically fermis. Since nuclei are positively charged, the resulting Coulomb 
repulsion makes it difficult in general to nuclei to get close enough together to fuse. 
One approach to overcoming the Coulomb barrier is to arrange for the nuclei to be 
very energetic ( as is done in magnetic fusion experiments or in stellar plasmas), or 
else to arrange for significant tunneling (as in muon catalyzed fusion). Skeptics were 
quick to point out that conditions in a metal hydride near room temperature does not 
lead either to sufficient kinetic energies or screening to lead to observable anomalous 
fusion rates. 

Heat production in Pons-Fleischmann experiments is hard to explain theoret­
ically through a fusion mechanism. Not only would a mechanism have to exist that 
would allow nuclei to get sufficiently close to fuse, but a second mechanism would 
also have to exist to modify the expected fusion reaction channels. For example, 
dd-fusion yields n +3 He or p + t for primary reaction products; neither of these paths
occur in Pons-Fleischmann experiments to a degree commensurate with the excess
heat. Many workers in the field think that the 4He branch is somehow favored, and
there seems to be some evidence supporting significant 4He production; it is hard to
understand quite how this could occur from a theoretical point of view.

The field got its name "cold fusion" originally from early speculations con­
cerning the source of heat and neutrons from the first electrochemistry experiments 
showing anomalous results. Although the anomalous neutron emission may have a 
component due to dd-fusion, the heat production is very hard to reconcile with fusion 
as described above. Reported observations of several of the other anomalies (fast 
ion emission, gamma emission and light water experiments) would be even harder to 
account for with a fusion mechanism. 

For these and other reasons, we have concluded that whatever is going on, 
the heat production is simply not due to fusion. It must be nuclear, which implies 
that we must consider new basic reaction pathways. 


3. Neutron Transfer Reactions

The first fundamental problem with fusion reactions occuring in a lattice at 
room temperature is the presence of a Coulomb barrier. A possible way around this 
which we have proposed is to pursue reactions which involve the transfer of neutrons 
from nuclei. A neutron is charge neutral, so that no Coulomb barrier occurs. Very 
significant other problems occur, but at least we no longer have to face the Coulomb 
barrier. A prototypical neutron transfer reaction (shown in Figure 1) would involve 
the transfer of a neutron from a donor nucleus (such as deuterium) to an acceptor 
nucleus (we have considered 2H, 6Li, 10B and Pd isotopes as possible acceptor nuclei).

Figure 1: Two-step virtual neutron transfer reaction from a donor nucleus to an 
acceptor nucleus. 

The second fundamental problem with fusion reactions is the problem of 
reconciling the reaction products with the experimentally observed products. In this 
case, if a neutron is to somehow go from one nucleus to another, we would expect to 
see primary or secondary capture gammas; these are observed at a low rate, down by 
many orders of magnitude from the heat-producing reaction rates. 

There is a more severe problem which occurs with neutron transfer reactions, 
and that is how would a neutron be transferred off of a nucleus to start such a 
reaction? The neutron is tightly bound (2.225 MeV binding energy for a deuteron), 
and it cannot be expected to be transferred off of a nucleus without good reason. A 
neutron can be removed from a deuteron through photodisintegration with a gamma 
or fast particle (see Figure 2), but almost any other proposed means of doing so 
will requre new physics. It can be shown that a lattice has no means of transferring 
sufficient energy to a neutron to ionize it short of accelerating an electron or ion up 
to MeV energy and kinetically knocking it out. 

Figure 2: ( a) Resonance transitions involving a real intermediate state driven by a 
laser. (b) Resonant neutron transfer reaction driven by a gamma. 

Our approach to this basic problem is to work with virtual neutrons by 
considering two-sep reactions which proceed through a virtual intermediate state. 
There is no way to arrange for sufficient energy to ionize a neutron in a lattice in 
room temperature, but there is a way (at least in principle) for continuum neutron 
states to be intermediate states driven off of resonance as part of a two-step reaction 
( as long as whatever happens at the other end is energetically allowed). This type of 
reaction is illustrated schematically in Figure 3. 

Virtual particles are known in various branches of physics, including nuclear 
physics. It is a rather easy exercise to show that a virtual neutron which is off-resonant 
by multiple MeV will not go further than a few fermis from its parent nucleus in free 
space. If the nucleus to which the neutron were being transferred were within fermis, 
then such a constraint would not hinder the overall reaction; the Coulomb barrier 
unfortunately prevents this. 

Figure 3: ( a) Raman transitions involving a virtual intermediate state driven by 
a laser. (b) Off-resonant neutron transfer reaction driven by a low frequency 
electric or magnetic field. 

Consequently, we are faced with the problem of arranging to get a virtual 
neutron from one nucleus to another over Angstrom distances, seemingly in the face 
of known physics saying that it can't be done. The demonstration that a virtual 
neutron doesn't stray appreciably from its point of origin is a free-space argument; 
we wondered whether long range interactions were possible in a lattice. 


4. Virtual Neutron Transfer

The theory for two-step reactions which involve a virtual intermediate state 
is well known, and the reaction rate for a transition from state O through a virtual 
intermediate state 1 to a final state 2 can be determined from Fermi's Golden Rule 
through 
where state 1 is driven at the frequency of state 0. This would correspond, for exam­
ple, to a reaction where a neutron is transferred from a deuteron to virtual continuum 
states by a DC magnetic field, and subsequently gamma captured elsewhere onto an 
acceptor nucleus. 

The Green's function for the virtual neutron is included in the term written 
symbolically as (E0 - H1)-1, and which actually means to compute '11 1 from
and then plug into 

The Hamiltonians which occur in the theory are second-quantized operators 
which are appropriate for a many-particle description of the system. We may reduce 
the problem down to its barest essentials if we focus on the wavefunction for the 
virtual neutron in the idealized case that there is only one deuteron in the lattice 
b.E is the energy deficit of the virtual neutron (on the order of -2.225 MeV), Hn is the 
Hamiltonian of the neutron, and '<Pn is the virtual neutron wavefunction. The term 
on the right hand side is the source for the neutron, which is due to the deuteron in 
a magnetic field. 

The virtual neutron wavefunction can be calculated in terms of the Green's 
function through 
where the Green's function satisfies 
The behavior of the Green's function determines the character of the virtual 
neutron wavefunction, and we can determine whether virtual neutrons will be able to 
transfer more than a few fermis by studying the associated neutron Green's function. 
In the case where the neutron is assumed not to interact with the lattice after being 
formed, we would take the neutron Hamiltonian to be 
and calculate the neutron Green's function to be 

This result assumes that the proton recoil is taken up by the lattice. We see that the 
range of the virtual neutron is severely limited to (ri2 /2Mn\l::!.E\)112, which evaluates 
to about 3 fm for this example. This is the origin of the argument that a virtual 
neutron simply does not go very far from its point of origin. 

We may include the primary effects of the lattice in the problem by including 
the nuclear potential responsible for Bragg scattering. In this case we take the neutron 
Hamiltonian to be  
where the potential V(r) is assumed to be periodic, and is expanded in terms of 
reciprocal lattice vectors K to give 
We are able to solve for the Green's function approximately in this case. We find 
that the Green's function is dominated by a local piece which is very nearly equal to 
the non-interacting Green's function described above, plus an additional very small 
long range piece which is induced by the periodic potential 
This long range piece is calculated to be equal to 
where kr is the extinction vector for normal Bragg reflection 
and where ft and h are auxiliary functions defined by 
In these formulas, Ii is a modified Bessel function of first order, and L1 is a modified 
Struve function of first order. 

Figure 4: Auxiliary functions fi(x) and h(x). 

We may use these results to compute rates for second order gamma emission 
through 
where Nj(O'jV)o is the gamma capture rate for isotope j for the virtual neutron. In 
the presence of a magnetic field of 100 KGauss, the second order gamma emission 
rate is estimated to be near 10-60 sec1 /deuteron in PdD. 


5. Resonance Exchange Scattering

We have succeeded in obtaining a long range contribution to the virtual 
neutron Green's function which is capable of delocalizing a neutron over a micron 
scale length. Unfortunately the associated rates for second order reactions through 
such a mechanism are calculated to be neglible. 

This result bodes unfavorably for neutron transfer reaction mechanisms unless 
some new physics can be found which would improve the virtual neutron density. 
While searching for possible resonant mechanisms, we noted that the capture of a 
neutron onto a proton to form a deuteron would be resonant if the neutron originated 
from a deuteron initially. Certainly protons exist in the Pd rods at a the few per cent 
level in the excess heat experiments. 

We have modeled the incoherent version of the process assuming that the 
initial deuteron is perturbed by a small amount bE, but that all subsequent captures 
and re-emissions occur in the Mossbauer limit of no phonon generation. In this case, 
the neutron Hamiltonian is modified to become 
where the operator W(r) satisfies 
Since the operator is of the form of an exchange term, we have termed the effect 
resonant exchange scattering. 

The exchange operator leads to Bragg scattering on the same footing as the 
direct neutron potential considered in the last section. We may expand 
where the expansion coefficients Wk-K,k are computed to be 
where the proton wavefunctions are parametrized by 'lf;p ~ e-a-plr-R.1
212, and where
the center of mass of the deuteron wavefunctions is parametrized by IJr D ~ e-a-vlr-R.1
The summation over j includes proton sites in the unit cell, and 

The exchange terms can be added to the direct terms in the development of
the Green's function in the presence of resonance exchange scattering; our results of
the last section can be applied here with the modification
Unfortunately, the expansion coefficients Wk-K,k for the incoherent version of this
new process are smaller by very roughly four orders of magnitude from the expansion
coefficients VK for direct potential scattering.

It appears that a coherent enhancement of the effect may be possible. The
resonant exchange scattering matrix element computed in second quantization is given
formally by
The evaluation of this expression yields
Using the parametrization of the proton and deuteron orbitals described above, this
leads to a result which can be cast as
This result is the coherent generalization of equation (20), and differs in the presence
of possible coherence factors, which are expectation values over the many-particle op­
erators f;_[apanaD] = Li b!,cx/ i)bD,cxn (i) and f+[ap,O'nO'D'] >= Lj bb,cxn, (j)bp,cxP,(j)
These operators satisfy commuation relations identical to those of spin operators, and 
permit the construction of eigenstates analogous to spin states. Such states were stud­
ied by Dicke, and lead to coherent enhancements of matrix elements of the sort which
appear in equation (25).

It has not been demonstrated yet that any particular mechanism is capable of
producing the requisite Dicke states which would lead to a coherent enhancement
of the resonant exchange scattering. It is our belief that diffusion in the quantum
limit would cause phase-preserving delocalization of hydrogen isotopes in a metal
hydride, and that this would lead to the production of anomalous effects observed in 
Pons-Fleischmann experiments. If this is true, then we would obtain 
The coherence number could be on the order of the number of sites enclosed in a cube 
with a volume which is on the order of Vcoh = L oh, where the scale length would be 
determined through Lcoh ~ J'Dr, and where D is the quantum diffusion coefficient 
and r is the phase destruction time (which we cojecture will be the NMR T2 time). If 
so, the coherence numbers of Ncoh ~ 1010 may be attainable, which would cause the 
coherent version of the resonant exchange scattering to dominate the virtual neutron 
dynamics. This limit would require a more sophisticated calculation for the Green's 
function than the perturbative result given above. 


6. Summary and Conclusions

We have proposed new coherent neutron transfer reactions to account for the 
anomalies which are associated with Pons-Fleischmann experiments. In this paper 
we have discussed the problems associated with the presence of a virtual neutron in a 
second order reaction, and we have summarized recent progress which we have made 
to date. Although lattice effects can cause a significant delocaliztion of the virtual 
neutron wavefunction, they are insufficient to lead to observable reaction rates. The 
coherent version of the new resonant exchange scattering mechanism which we have 
found appears to have the potential to provide large theoretical rates. If our conjecture 
is correct, the mechanism would be specific to deuterium in metal hydrides with high 
diffusion coefficients at room temperature. 

Heat production in the theory could come from at least two reaction pathways. 
The neutron transfer could occur to the ground state of the acceptor (such as 6Li or 
10B, and the energy transfer could occur to the lattice via the gap jumping mechanism 
which we have found in an earlier work3• Alternatively, the neutron transfer could 
occur to a relatively long-lived excited state of an acceptor nucleus (perhaps a Pd 
isotope), which might subsequently alpha decay. 


References 

1. P. L. HAGELSTEIN, "Coherent and Semi-Coherent Neutron Transfer Reactions
I: The Interaction Hamiltonian," Fusion Tech. 22, 172-180, (1992).
2. P. L. HAGELSTEIN, "Coherent and Semi-Coherent Neutron Transfer Reactions
II: Transition Operators," submitted to Fusion Tech., (1992)
3. P. L. HAGELSTEIN, "Coherent and Semi-Coherent Neutron Transfer Reactions
III: Phonon Generation," to appear in Fusion Tech. (1992)
P. L. HAGELSTEIN, "Coherent and Semi-Coherent Neutron Transfer Reac­
tions IV: Two-Step Reactions and Virtual Neutrons," submitted to Fusion Tech. 
November (1992)
