deals with how it can be used to produce energy. Several
novel direct energy conversion concepts for use with cold fusion
are discussed.


INTRODUCTION

Cold fusion, if it is real, using the electrolytic means developed
by Fleischmann and Pons,1 would not match up
well with most energy conversion methods. The main problem
with this method is that the crystal can only heat water.
Given the best possible scenario, steam could be produced to
power turbines and eventually produce electricity. To generate
a high enough temperature to produce high-quality steam,
the crystal would have to be kept at high temperatures (600
to 800 K). There is so little known about the alleged cold fusion
process that high-temperature operation is not a given.
In fact, one would expect from basic physics that the deuterium
density in the crystal should decrease with temperature.
Hence, the cold fusion rate should also decrease with temperature.

Jones et al.2 from Brigham Young University (BYU)
have reported observations of low-level neutrons from an
electrochemical cell.

Several potential alternative methods of initiating cold fusion
have been proposed. A group from the Centro Ricerche
Energia Frascati led by Scaramuzzi announced that they have
observed low-level neutron emission from titanium shavings
placed in a pressure vessel filled with D2. In this experiment,
it was possible to control the gas and titanium temperature
and the gas density. A similar experiment was conducted by
a group at Mississippi State University.3

The Fusion Research Laboratory at the University of
Missouri is working on a method of implanting ions from a
Maxwellian plasma into palladium, titanium, rhenium, tantalum,
nickel, etc., to achieve cold fusion. It appears that
there is low-level neutron emission4 similar to the BYU
study.2 Similar experiments are being carried out at the Fusion
Studies Laboratory at the University of Illinois5 and by
a group at Mississippi State University.3 In the University of Missouri study, the temperature of the sample had to be kept
at or below room temperature

sma methods over the electrolytic method is that more advanced
energy conversion systems can be implemented.
Clearly, the electrolytic method is limited to a Rankine energy
conversion cycle at best. However, both the high-density gas
and Maxwellian plasma methods can incorporate many possible
types of energy conversion cycles.


ENERGY CONVERSION METHODS

The normal channel for deuterium fusion is
n + 3He + 3.5 MeV
D + D . (1)
p + T + 4.04 MeV

The Fleischmann-Pons experiment reportedly releases 50
times the energy input. Clearly, if reaction (1) were responsibility
for this energy release, the neutron production would
be deadly. Therefore, the evidence indicates that the fusion
reaction in Eq. (1) does not account for the reported energy
released in the palladium. However, scientists such as Walling
from the University of Utah and Hagelstein at Massachusetts
Institute of Technology have identified another possible
reaction that could account for the energy release in the
Fleischmann-Pons experiment:
D + D 4He + 7 + 23.8 MeV (2)
and
D + D - 4 H e + 23.8 MeV . (3)
News accounts have attributed Pons with discovering 4He in
his "fusion" experiment using a palladium crystal. Normally,
it is expected that reaction (2), which releases a gamma ray,
would dominate reaction (3). However, theorists have postulated
that the crystal itself takes up the excitation energy in
the fused 4He. Therefore, reaction (3) can be dominant. The
main product of the cold fusion experiment reported by
Fleischmann and Pons would have to be 4He. It has not yet
been proven, however, that they have observed fusion

The question of interest to direct energy conversion is
whether or not the 4He, if it is produced, carries off any kinetic
energy. It is possible that the palladium crystal lattice permits complete transfer of the energy so that 4He, remains
embedded in the crystal.

To use the direct energy conversion systems discussed in
this paper, it is necessary that the low-level activity of reaction
(1) observed by Jones et al.2 be enhanced somehow or
that the 4He in reaction (3) have a sufficient amount of kinetic
energy to be useful.

If one were able to extract the charged-particle products
from fusion, it would be possible to produce many useful
forms of energy. We know that charged particles can interact
with matter to produce excitation and ionization. It is possible
to produce photons, excited states and excitation, and
chemicals from these reactions.6-8 

There are a number of useful products that one can create
with photons, including chemicals from photochemical or
photoelectrochemical reactions, electricity from photoelectric
reactions, and lasers through photolytic reactions. Additionally,
chemicals can be produced directly from the interaction
of ions with matter and a laser can be produced directly from
the interaction of ions with matter.

It is possible to transport ions from the cold fusion target
material (e.g., palladium, titanium, rhenium, nickel, etc.)
if the target is thin. The target should be thin enough so that
the energy transport range of an energetic ion created in a fusion
reaction is larger than the thickness of the target. One
possible way of assembling such a target is to use thin films,
as shown in Fig. 1.

Another potential method of assembling an energy conversion
configuration is to use an aerosol form of the cold fusion
target material, as shown in Fig. 2. This method is
similar to that used for the aerosol core reactor energy conversion
system.4

would be small enough so that ions produced from fusion
could escape. The aerosol would have to be transported from
the area where the targets were saturated with deuterium to
an area where the reactant material is located. This method
lends itself well to the production of photons in the reactant
material. The aerosol can be made optically thin enough to
allow photons to be transported out and used by a variety of
secondary reactants (e.g., photovoltaic cells for electrical production,
substrates for photochemical conversion, and photolytically
driven laser media for coherent photon production).
These types of systems have been discussed for fission and fusion
energy conversion.

There is also the possibility of using thin-wall cylinders
made of target material with the plasma on the inside and
the energy conversion material on the outside, as shown in Fig. 3. This type of configuration is known as a reentrant surface
since any fusion product generated in the thin wall will
eventually enter the reactant material. Half of the products
will enter the reactant material immediately, while the remaining
products will first enter the central region before being
transported out to the reactant.


POTENTIAL ENERGY CONVERSION MATERIALS

The excimer ultraviolet (UV) energy conversion method
was developed in 1981 (Refs. 7 and 9). The concept uses energetic
charged particles from fusion reactions to ionize and excite a gaseous medium, which in turn produces a narrowbandwidth,
single-line UV radiation. Gaseous media that can
produce UV emission of this nature are the high-efficiency
excimer media. This UV radiation can then drive photochemical,
photoelectrochemical, or photoelectric reactions to produce
useful forms of energy

A system efficiency of 25% for fusion-driven photochemical
reactions was reported.7,9 Synfuels (e.g., H2 and CO)
were the assumed useful energy product. Conversely, the
photoelectric and photoelectrochemical reactions for use in
fusion energy conversion would require the development of
a doped semiconductor material that is specially tailored with
a band gap to match the UV radiation.9 A predicted system
efficiency of 56% for fusion-driven photoelectrochemical reactions
and 56% for fusion-driven photoelectric reactions
was reported.9 Studies of the excimer UV energy conversion
method were also carried out for fission reactors using photoelectric
and photoelectrochemical reactions and indicated
system efficiencies of —40% (Ref. 6). One of the major assumptions
in these studies is that UV photocells can be developed.
The highest band gap available for standard materials
is that of diamond (—5.0 eV). The most efficient excimer UV
radiation sources, the rare gas excimers, have much larger
photon energies (>7 eV) and hence the development of photocells
for these excimers is not assured. However, the outlook
for such cells is hopeful since solid-state physicists have
focused primarily on materials with band gaps in the few
electron-volt range and have basically ignored the higher band
gap energy ranges. Rare gas halide excimers have lower energies
(3.5 eV for XeF* and 5 eV for KrF*), and while their fluorescence
efficiency may be lower than that of the rare gas
excimers, their photon energy falls in the range of known
semiconductor materials.

For some atoms, like the noble gases (e.g., xenon, krypton,
argon), the atoms repel one another, for interatomic distances
characteristic of diatomic molecules, if both are in the
ground state. However, if one of the atoms is in an excited
state, it is then possible to form a bond with the other neutral
atom. This type of bonding leads to the excimer state.
Technically, an excimer is defined as an excited dimer state
(i.e., the bonding of like atoms such as Xe*, Kr*, etc.). Today
the term encompasses the bonding of excited molecules
with unlike atoms (e.g., XeF*, HgCl*, Cdl*). The common
attribute of excimers is that the energy flow from incident
charged particles through the excimer bound-free transition
to the narrow-band photon output can occur with very high
efficiency. A wide range of photon energies are also possible
with different excimers.

Laboratory measurements have demonstrated high fluorescence
efficiencies for excimers. Experiments with a variety
of excitation sources (e.g., electrons, fission fragments,
protons) and particle densities have given fluorescence efficiency
values ranging from a few percent to as high as 68%
(see Ref. 6). The most efficient fluoresces are the rare gas excimers.

Energetic ions from the debris of the fusion can then interact
with the excimer mixture to produce photons. In turn,
the photons can, for example, interact with photovoltaic cells
placed on the walls of the reactor to produce electricity.10
Radiation damage to the photovoltaics from X rays and neutrons
is a concern. However, it is well known that ionizing radiation
appears to enhance fluorescence absorption efficiency in continuous-wave insulating crystal lasers. Additionally, if
a radiation-damaged crystal is thermally annealed, the damage
disappears. Potential crystalline photovoltaic materials
exist that may experience the positive effects described above
(e.g., NaCl and A1203).

Other possible reactants would be inorganic chemicals,
such as H 2 0 or C02 , which can produce the useful feedstock
materials H2 and CO through photolytic reactions. There is
even a possibility of using a laser material reactant to produce
coherent photons.

The energetic fusion products can interact with a variety
of energy conversion materials not discussed here.


CONCLUSION

In conclusion, if the Fleischmann-Pons experiments are
proven correct or if the low-level reactions observed by Jones
et al. can be enhanced, the electrochemical method of producing
fusion would have limited applications. It would be
necessary to identify new ways of extracting fusion products
in order to tap the vast potential of the cold fusion reaction.
Two potential methods have been discussed in this technical
note. If either of these methods succeeds, then there are a
number of ways to extract the energetic ion reaction products
for direct energy conversion.