INTRODUCTION

This work was begun after the Workshop on Cold Fusion at Santa Fe in May, 1989
(1) The failure to reproduce neutrons or "excess heat" (2) suppressed the surge of interest
in the "Cold Fusion" effect at that time. We asked ourselves a question: If this anomalous
phenomenon is not a mistake, how do we identify the phenomenon? The neutron was
selected as a fusion product to identify the nuclear reaction in many cold fusion
experiments. But the low level signal of neutrons in a -background was one of the
difficulties. Sporadic bursts of signals coming in unpredictable times made it even more
difficult to measure in a convincing way. This irreproducibility and unpredictability has
mired "cold fusion" in a mist of illusion. We suggested that before the emission of the
fusion products occurs, there must be some precursor reactions. If we can measure the
precursors and find the correlation between the fusion products and the precursors, then the
measurement of sporadic bursts would be more convincing. Besides, the precursor might
also guide our approach to the cold fusion phenomena and make it easier to solve the
problem of reproducibility.


PRECURSORELECTROMAGNETIC RADIATION

Among the possible precursors, we selected electromagnetic radiation as the first
target. We believe that a nuclear fusion reaction is possible only if the Coulomb barrier is
screened somehow. The experiment (3) proved that the muon is not the necessary a
negative charge which screens the positive core of the Coulomb force. The only available
candidate is the electron. Although the mass of the electron is too small to screen the
Coulomb barrier in an effective way in a free atom, we still hope that there might be some
mechanism in an atomic lattice that causes a screening effect. If this is true in a
deuterium/solid system, the electrons must change their states before effective screening
happens. Thus, we may expect to see certain electromagnetic radiation before the
anomalous nuclear effect appears. The photon of this electromagnetic radiation should be
in the range from 10 eV to 3 keV, since the electron should approach an orbit similar to that
of a muon in order to screen the Coulomb barrier effectively. This electromagnetic
radiation is ultra-violet or soft X-ray; hence, we have to measure them close to the source
to avoid serious attenuation. The Frascati experiment (4) provided a good chance to detect
this electromagnetic radiation.


ENERGETIC CHARGED PARTICLES

In order to identify the fusion reaction, we thought that energetic charged particle is
a better identification than the neutron. However, energetic charged particles cannot
penetrate the vessel the way the neutron does, so we have to detect it inside the vessel.

The first step of the experiment was to determine whether there is any
electromagnetic radiation and emission of the charged particles in a deuterium/solid
system. This paper reports the result of this first step of the experiment to search the
electromagnetic radiation and charged particle emission.

A thermoluminescence detector (TLD) was selected to detect the electromagnetic
radiation, because it is easy to use it to make a close-up measurement in a high pressure
vessel, and because it has high sensitivity with low background. The TLD (CaF2) was
selected for its high sensitivity in the range of interest. The plastic-track detector (CR-39)
was selected for charged particle detection for the same reason. Pre-etching was used to
discriminate the existing background tracks before starting the experiment. A control run
was used to see the effects due to any -emitting nuclides in the palladium foils, or due to
airborne radon or cosmic-rays.

Palladium foil (0.02 cm × 0.5 cm × 2 cm), CR-39 and TLD are put together in
a sandwich-like structure. The structure was heated to 500°C for 2 hours at 7  10-2
torr, and then sealed in a stainless cell attached to a source of D2 gas. After
evacuating the cell using a roughing pump (1.5 × 10-2 torr) we loaded D2 gas to a
pressure of 9 atm, and immersed the cell in liquid nitrogen for 4 hours. Then the
valve between cell and the D2 source was closed, and we let it warm to 20°C when
the liquid nitrogen vaporized. The cooling and warming cycle was repeated several
times. The entire experiment lasted about 2 days, after which we etched the CR-39
film for 6 hours (6.25 mol NaOH 70°C) together with the CR-39 films from the
blank run (in air) and control run (in H2+Pd cell). The TLD (CaF2) are measured by
Thermoluminescence Dosimetry.


RESULTS

The results are shown in Table 1. Although the calibration for TLD (CaF2)
is not available yet, the comparison between the sample runs and blank runs has
shown that there is some electromagnetic radiation in the deuterium/palladium
and hydrogen/palladium system. The interesting point is that although the H2 cell
exhibits similar signal of electromagnetic radiation as D2 cell, it gives no charged
particle tracks in CR-39 film. Fig. 1 shows a series of photos of CR-39, taken by
differential interference microscopy.


background

Fig. la shows the photo of CR-39 from the D2+Pd cell. It is clear that there are
some tracks of energetic charged particles. In order to estimate the energy and charge
of these particles, we show the photo of CR-39 irradiated by a particle source (Am source with intensity of 4 x 105/min in 2 solid angle) in Fig. lb. The sizes of these
tracks are comparable. In Fig. lc, the photo of CR-39 from an H2 cell is shown as a control
run. The contrast between them is apparent. It hints that the signals in TLD (CaF2) are not
caused by energetic charged particles. The electromagnetic radiation might originate from
electrons which are transiting from state to state when palladium foils are filled with
hydrogen or deuterium. In Fig. 1d, a photo of CR-39 from a cell with D2 only (no
palladium). It proved that D2 alone cannot produce a charged particle signal. Fig. le and
Fig. 1f show a kind of special signal, a group of tracks, at a different magnification (×300
and ×600, respectively). This special signal might be caused by a burst of charged
particles.

In October, 1989, P.B. Price et al. published their results of experiments using
CR-39. (5) They found only two tracks for charged particles in CR-39. This is quite
different from our results. Having compared the experimental details we found an
important difference: they cleaned the samples with aqua regia. We repeated our
experiment with the sample cleaned with aqua regia. To our great surprise, the tracks in
CR-39 disappeared (Fig. lg). We analyzed the surface of palladium cleaned by aqua regia,
using the auger electron scanning probe. A clear peak of chlorine appeared (Fig. 2). Using
the argon ion mill, we found that the chlorine penetrated into the palladium to a depth of a
few hundred angstroms (Fig. 3). When we used the chlorine gas to contaminate palladium
surface intentionally, we again found that the CR-39 tracks disappeared.


SUMMARY

To summarize our experimental results, we have three points:
First, there is some sort of electromagnetic radiation which might be a precursor of
the anomalous nuclear effect. Hence, we design the next step of experiment to diagnose the
electromagnetic radiation in real time. The electromagnetic radiation is different from the
electromagnetic radiation caused by energetic charged fusion products, which can not be
taken as a precursor.

Second, we have detected charged particle signals in a deuterium/palladium system
repeatedly, as long as we use the palladium foil cut from the same sheet of palladium. Since
the charged particles have a range of only a few microns in the palladium, this suggests that
the anomalous nuclear effects are related to some surface phenomena.

Third, surface contamination may suppress the anomalous nuclear effects. This
may explain why many experiments failed in the past year.

These three points together are consistent with the electron screening model, which
has been suggested by the existing nuclear reaction data at low energy (6).


REFERENCES

1) Workshop on Cold Fusion Phenomena, sponsored by Los Alamos National Laboratory
and U.S. Dept. of Energy, May 23-25, 1989, Santa Fe, New Mexico,USA.
2) S. E. Jones, et al., Nature (London) 338, 737 (1989); M. Fleischmann, S. Pons, and M. Hawkins, J. Electroanal. Chem. 261, 301 (1989).
3) K. Kagamine, et al. "Evidence Against Condensed Matter Fusion Induced by
Cosmic-Ray Muons", Workshop on Cold Fusion Phenomena, sponsored by Los Alamos
National Laboratory and U.S. Dept. of Energy, May 23-25, 1989, Santa Fe, New Mexico,
USA.
4) A. DeNinno, et al., Nuovo Cimento, 10lA, 841 (1989).
5) P. B. Price, et al., Phys. Rev. Letts. 263, 1926 (1989).
6) K. Langanke, et al., Modern Phys. Letts. A 4, 2101 (1989).
