Experimental Evidences for the Harmonic Oscillator Resonance and Electron Accumulation :Model of Cold Fusion.

1'v1ichel RAMBAUT


Abstract

Cold Fusion outside any substratum is again considered from the Harmonic oscillator
resonance and electron accumulation (HOREA) model point of view. If one adds Fractal
theory, one gets a more straigthforward agreement with the experimental growth of fusion
burst after the apex I of a fast current, and varying approximately like the tenth power I lO.
Then it is shown that the model could account for the solar neutrino discrepancy. The paper
ends up by a short reminder of two experimental data, in agreement with the HOREA point of
view: experimentally noticed Electron accumulations, and Top-Table soft X-ray Laser
operation.


1. Introduction

The fusion process in a deuterated medium, outside any substratum has been told
previously as being a particular one, among the various process, famed as being Cold Fusion
processes [l]. The process described by the HOREA model is probably the most general
process underlying the ex-perimental observations, even in the case where the phenomenon
occurs in a substratum like Palladium, Nickel, or in any other substrat which can absorb
Hydrogen [2]. Inspite ex-perimental data are still scarce and sometimes questionable,in the case
of the process "'ithout substratum, if coupled with the HO REA model, they are leading to a
quantitative description. This Cold Fusion approach has links with some frontier problems, like
the fractality of a medium, the operation of a star like the Sun, and also' with the validity of the
Heaviside Fitzgerald and Lodge interpretation the Maxwellian Electrodynamics, which came
out in 1888 [3].


2. The Fractal Point of view: A new insight into the fusion experiments bv
fast transitory currents

The fractal point of view gives a more strikinipicture of the agreement between the Kiel
and NRL ex-periments [2] and the HOREA model. During the leading edge of the current
pattern, the medium was ionized; and as soon as the peak was reached, the neutron burst
occured, which is conjectured to be only a testimony-like of the D+ D➔4He reactions.
According this model, the phenomenon is marked by a Poisson distribution of two colliding
deuteron places and it is possible to take into account, as a good representative parameter, the
De Broglie wavelength of the Deuteron. This distribution is the mark of the fractal character
[4] of the fusible medium. Using the Schrodinger equation, it has been obtained, a linear
relationship in logarithmic scale, of the fusion production term T, in function of the Deuteron
energy, which has the same slope, than the one in function of the De Broglie wavelength [1].
The box counting dimension, practical approximation of the Hausdorff dimension [ 4], is
obtained by dividing the fusible medium into a three-dimensional mesh, composed of boxes or
practically of cubes, whose side length is 3; it is the limit of the logarithm of the number N0 of
boxes containing an element of the medium, in function of the logarithm of the cube size
inverse 1/3. Practically, one uses only an approximation of D, with a finite size o, determined
by Physics. In the specific case of the electron accumulation fusion medium, one can convert
the D expression into one depending on the mean rate μ of Deuteron in a cubic box of side 8,
given by the Poisson law. The probability P1 for a boxe containing one Deuteron is thus, n
being the number of Deuteron per volume unit. And the probability P 2 for a boxe containing two Deuterons:

The number of boxes vvith two Deuterons being ½ 86 n2, and as 8 is typically in the range of
1 o-9 cm, for colliding Deuterons, and n of the order of 1023 /cm3 , it is low, and e-μ can be
replaced by one. So the practical expression of the fractal dimension D is:
The mean ratio between the number of boxes, and containing two Deuterons, and the number 
of boxes containing one Deuteron is very close to µ/2. Given that all boxes containing one 
unique Deuteron are supposed to give up their electron to the boxe containing two Deuterons, 
one can ex-press the fractal dimension D in function of the v number of the electrons 
accumulated around the two colliding Deuterons [l] (v = 2/µ),n and taking into account the 
relationship, 
This D expression, makes a link with the quantum calculation, which was fulfilled for some 
specific values ofv [l]. The NRL !1° power law, surprising at first sight, is directly linked with 
the fractality of the fusible medium. A medium vvhich would be submitted to thermonuclear 
conditions, would not give such a power law, given that the fratal dimension would be 
evidently equal to 3. The figure 1 gives the fractal dimension D variations in function of the 
logarithm of the density n, for 3 values of the electron number accumulated around two 
colliding Deuterons. It is interesting to emphazize on the agreement of those values with the 
ones resulting from Schrodinger calculations. For example, for n=l022/cm3, the fractal 
dimension deduced from Schrodinger calculations is 1. 92, the electron number being equal to v 
= l.3xl o3, whereas the direct calculation gives 1. 94 for the fractal dimension. The agreement 
benveen the two ways to get the fractal dimension has a deep physical significance, which 
needs to be still digged deeper. 


3. Account for the solar neutrino discrepancv.

v=l03 
The solar neutrino counting reveals a discrepancy of approximately 30 percents, 
confirmed recently [5] between the 123 SNU, predicted by the standard model, and the 83 
SNU effectivelv detected with a uncertainty of 21 SNU (One Safar Neutrino Unit (SNU) 
corr;sponds to fo-36 neutrino interaction per atom of the detector and per second). The solar 
standard model describes the SUll as being roughly constituted of three parts: the core, the 
radiative zone, and the convection zone [6]. It is characterized by some physical parameters: 
the solar luminosity: L0 = 3.826 1033 erg s-1 , the solar radius: R0 = 6.9598 1010 cm, the inner 
convection zone radius: 0. 73 R0, corresponding to a temperature of l.3x106 K, to a density of 

0.15 g cm-3 [7], and to a pressure of 6xl012 dynes/cm3. :

In the convection zone there is no possiblity of thermonuclear reaction, but there should 
be some possibilities of fusion reactions, by the HOREA process. This hypothesis is in 
agreement with the effect of electron accumulation bringing about the fusion process, which 
can only occur in an ionized medium, submitted to turbulence, for example during the trailing 
edge of a fast current pattem[2]. 

The cold fusion process in solar convection zone is supposed essentially due to nuclear 
reactions between Deuterons. With the above parameters, the number of nuclei per cm3 is in 
the range of some units of 1022, and given the relative great rate of Hydrogen [7], the 
Hydrogen particle number n is close to this value. Taking into account the mass fraction of 
Hydrogen and Helium, one has approximately n(H) ==O. 92 n, so one can take in first 
approximation n = l.Oxl022/cm3, for the mean hydrogen nuclei number in the convection 
zone, and as the Deuterium/Hydrogen ratio is D/H < 4xI0-5, the Deuterium density is 
approximately determined by n(D) < 4.0x 10171cm3. 

The expression of the Fusion energy production of the HO REA model is rather different 
from the one deduced from the Lawson criterium [8]. 

E is the energy produced during the  t lapse of time, n is a particle number, able to participate 
to the fusion nuclear reaction, T called "the production term", describes the crossing of the 
"screened" Coulomb barrier, e is the energy, given off by one nuclear reaction. 

The T value is obtained from the relationship, depending on the fractal dimension D, 
between the "production term" T and the Deuteron energy f. (TITO ==(f.lE.0}°). Supposing a 
Deuteron energy given by the Boltzmann equality (f. == 3/2 k 0), one gets f. = 129 eV. But the 
interesting parameters of the laboratory experiment TO and f.o are in fact poorly known. The 
ion energy mean value f.o is largeley superior to the thermal one (less than 1 eV in Kiel 
conditions), at the time of the fast current decreasei by resonance effect [2]. With D around
1.5, T0 should be estimated in the range 10-27 -IO- 6 cm3/sec, and T in the solar convection
zone ,should be in the maximum range 1 o-25 -1 o-24 cm3/sec. 

But the behaviour of the medium cannot be described completely by the above expression 
of the energy E, whereas the number of fusible Deuterons is very low in comparison with the 
number of the other ions. One has in fact to multiply the "production term" T, by the 
probability for fusible ions, to be in touch. This probability can be evaluated considering a 
volume V of the medium containing two Deuterons and 2xH/D non fusible ions. If V is cubic, 
for the simplicity of calculation, and containing   cells, one can show that this probability Pf of 
collision for a possible fusion process in the elementary box is: 
Pf = 2x26(   - 6 213 ) (   - 2 )!/ (s)!

The E fusion rate of formula 16) has thus to be multiplied by Pf With the above numerical 
values, one gets Pf < 8.6 10-
, and for the total energy production per second W, in the 
convection zone: 

1.0 1033 erg/sec< W < 1.0 1034 erg/sec :
This range includes the third of solar luminosity. One ought get a value close to 
L0/3 = l.2753x1033 erg s-1• New well instrumented experiments, a little similar to the Kiel 
ones, and new complete computer calculations, could let us to conclude, but the rough 
estimate, utilizing the mean values, does not gives a great discrepancy. In fact the solar central 
inner core could a little cooler than is usually estimated. 


3. Non Fusion Experiments in agreement with the HOREA model

Electron clusters, as great as 2xlOiO are told to be produced by a variety of sources. In 
the ref.[9], is given the description of a specific one. Nevertheless the possible existence of 
those cluster is linked with the question of physical validity of the so called Maxwell equations, 
which are in fact the result of an interpretation of MaxwelJ theory by Heaviside and Al [3]. 

Assigning a physical value to the vector potential, like in Schrodinger calculations for HOREA, 
a possible explanation could based on a possible energy oscillation with the De Broglie 
wavelength, of the Faraday field, like has been claiming P.Beckmann [9]. 

Another experiment is a lasing one at 46.5 run: it has been achieved recently by J.J.Rocca 
et Al [10]. Tue basic idea was to perform a direct excitation of the plasma medium by a pulsed 
discharge, instead of exciting it by an exterior flux: it has consisted of running a pulsed current 
through the lasing medium. The current pulse had an amplitude of 40 kA and a half period of 


60 ns. Diagnostics using a 5 ns detector gate indicate that lasing occurs near the moment of 

maximum compression, shortly after the peak of the current pulse. This observation has to be 
brought nearer wit a similar observation made in the Kiel and NRL experiments, showing that 
neutron production occurs shortly after the peak of the current pulse [ l] [2]. Apart the fact 
that nuclear reactions cannot occur, it seems that the process leading to lasing phenomenon 
could be described by the HOREA model. 


5.Conclusion

Even if the experimental data are still too scarce and imprecise, there is an growing 
agreement with HOREA model. Firstly, the tentative fusion pulsed experiments, considered 
from the fractal point of view, reveal the existence of a dispersed process in a cold medium. In 
another terms it is an indirect proof of the Cold Fusion existence. As for the application of the 
model to the solar case, reveals that it could account for the thirty percent deficiency of solar 
neutrinos, inspite the approximative knowledge of the Deuteron density and of the 
production termT, the inner solar core being cooler than usually estimated. 

All those e,q:ierimental facts, linked with the HO REA model, constitute a network of non 
contradictory elements revealing the effectiveness of Cold Fusion outside an.y specific 
substratum. Those elements are moreover non contradictory with non fusion experiments, like 
electron accumulation experiments, and Table-Top X-ray laser experiments. 

References 
[ l]. M.Rambaut, Physics Letters A 163 (1992) 335-342, 30 march 1994 & Physics Letters A
164 (1992), 155-163, 13 April 1992.
[2] M.Rambaut, Transactions of Fusion Technology, volume 26, Number 4T, Part 2, 486-492,
December 1994 & Proceedings: Fourth International Conference on Cold Fusion,Volume 4,
24-1, EPRI publication 1994.
[3] T.W.Barret, Electromagnetic Phenomena not explained by Maxwell's equations, in Essays
on the Formal Aspects of Electromagnetic Theory, Editor Akhlesh Lakhtakia, World
Scientific, 1993.
[4] B.Mandelbrot, "Les objets fractals",Flammarion, Paris, (1975); "Fractals: Form, Chance
and Dimension, Freeman, San Francisco, (1977); "The Fractal Geometry ofNature", Freeman,
San Francisco (1983).
[5] P.Anselman et al., Physics Letters B, 285, 376, 1992 & 285, 390, 1992.
[6] John N.Bahcall, Walter F.Huebner, Stephen H.Lubow, Peter D.Parker, Roger KUlrich,
Review of Modern Physics, Vol. 54, N 3, July 1982.
[7] Kenneth R.Lang, Astrophysical Formulae, Springer-Verlag, 1986.
[8]. M.Rambaut, Frontiers of Cold Fusion, ICCF3, Nagoya, October 21-25, 1993, Universal
Academic Press,lnc, pages 601-604.
[9] Petr Beckmann, "Electron clusters", Galilean Electrodynamics, vol.I, N 3, pp.55-58,
Sept/Oct 1990.
[10] J.J Rocca, V.Shlyaptsev, F.G.Tomasel, O.D.Cort zar, D.Hartshorn, and J.L.A.Chilla,
Physical Review Letters, Volume 73, Number 16, 17 October 1994 & G.P.Collins, Physics
Today, October 1994, 19-22.
