MEMORANDUM ON THE PRESENT STATE OF KNOWLEDGE ON COLD
FUSION

H. GERISCHER, FRITZ HARBER INSTITUTE DER MAX PLANCK,
Gesellschaft, Faraday Weg 4-6 D-1000, Berlin 33

Concerning the origin of this memorandum: Between the 30th of June and the 4th of July,
there took place in Como, Italy, the Second Annual Conference about Cold Fusion. This had been
organized by Italian groups, principally from the Universities of Turin and Milan. The joint
chairmen of the conference were Prof. T. Bressani (Turin) and Prof. G. Preparata (Milan).

At the end of May I was invited to attend this conference as a skeptical observer and found
that I was down on the program for the last day of the conference as giving a lecture on the pros and
cons of the field. There were about 60 lecturers at the meeting in groups from the USA, Italy, Japan,
China, Soviet Union, and various smaller countries which all gave their results. Two comprehensive
reviews had been already sent to me in manuscript form, - one of them has already appeared (1) and
the other will shortly appear. On the basis of these two reviews I was able to prepare myself
somewhat for the conference.


THE INDICATIONS OF OCCURRENCE OF NUCLEAR PROCESSES IN METALDEUTERIUM ALLOYS

In spite of my earlier conclusion, - and that of the majority of scientists, - that the phenomena
reported by Fleischmann and Pons in 1989 (3) depended either on measurement errors or were of
chemical origin, there is now undoubtedly overwhelming indications that nuclear processes take
place in the metal alloys. The early publications were so full of errors in measurement technique and
in the interpretation that the euphoria to which the discovery gave rise was rapidly replaced by
disappointment when it turned out that the laboratories with the best equipment could not reproduce
the results. Only very few groups found similar effects, but even these groups could not find
reproducibility in their own laboratory. Furthermore the supposition that a fusion of two deuterium
atoms could take place in a solid body such as PdDx or TiDx was contradictory to all theories of
nuclear reactions. In particular the observed (or maintained) heat effects bore no relationship to the
tiny amounts of nuclear products which had been found by a few authors. The main search here
went towards neutrons and tritium because according to fusion of two D+
 nuclei in hot plasmas, the
following two reactions would occur with about the same probability:

D+
 + D+
 >- n (2.45 MeV) + 3
He (0.82 MeV)

D+
 + D+
 >- H+
 (3.02 MeV) + 3
H (1.01 MeV)

Now, the sensitivity of instruments for detecting neutrons is particularly good and therefore
the majority of the measurements concentrated on experiments which would give rise to such
detection. This was particularly true in experiments which were carried out at low temperatures
from palladium which had been previously loaded with deuterium. In the electrochemical loading
of palladium by cathodic evolution of deuterium either from an alkaline or acid electrolyte in D2O
(predominantly with the electrolyte LiOD) from time to time a tritium enrichment would be found
which was considerably higher than could arise from differences expected for separation factors
during the discharge of D2O from an electrolyte containing DTO. The occasional observation of
neutrons with intensities which were decisively above the background, and with tritium amounts in
the electrolyte which were certainly and indication for the occurrence of nuclear processes is very
significant, but the amounts were so small that the heat observed could not by explained by their
occurrence. Correspondingly, it has been found that the neutron production is sporadic and occurs
in bursts. The same occurs for the tritium enrichment and also for the heat production.

The occurrence of such happenings could not in any way be foreseen on the basis of previous
knowledge. Correspondingly, the authors of the papers admitted that the reported positive results
were only occasionally obtained, and that many experiments ran through without any observable
nuclear consequences at all, facts which lent further doubt as to the reality of the effects.
As far as the interpretation of the nuclear reactions goes it has been suggested (4,5) that a
reaction occurs which plays no part at all in the hot plasmas, namely:

D + D >- 4
He (0.076 MeV) + gamma (23.77 MeV) (Eq 3).

The gamma radiation which should occur according to this reaction is, however, not
observed. However, very recently there have been reports about the observation of helium in
electrolytically evolved deuterium from a LiOD/D2O solution in cells with palladium electrodes.
In these experiments heat production was also calorimetrically observed. The amount of 4
He was
indeed in the right order of magnitude according to equation 3 although the agreement was not
quantitative. On the other hand, corresponding water blank experiments using LiOH/H2O showed
neither any heat excesses nor any helium in the evolved hydrogen gas.


AN EVALUATION OF THE RESULTS OBSERVED SO FAR

Although there are many discrepancies in the reports which are at hand, and although there
are many open questions, there now lie before us several indications that fusion reactions do occur
between deuterides in metals. This gives rise to a new situation. It is entirely an open question
whether such processes could be used as the source of energy but this, of course, can only be
decided if the processes which have been revealed in the work discussed here are researched and
given a theoretical basis. In any case I consider it absolutely necessary that these phenomena are
systematically researched and the conditions for their reproducibility cleared up. That a nuclear
reaction can be stimulated by interaction with a solid lattice and made to take another path from that
which it would take in the plasma, is an entirely unexpected discovery with possibly wide-ranging
consequences. It demands confirmation and further experimental evaluation. In the following a
number of experimental and theoretical questions are raised which are at the present time entirely
open.


EXPERIMENTAL PROBLEMS

The overwhelming problem is the lack of reproducibility in the results. The anomalous
phenomena in palladium and titanium can only be seen after very long times of loading, usually after
several weeks. In the loading there is a phase change in which the alpha phase is changed to the beta
phase and this involves a change in lattice constants which gives rise to a volume increase of about
15%. The microcrystalline structure of the solid seems to play an important role here. However,
the structure of the solid is not yet characterized. The lattice structure seems to be an important part
of the conditions necessary for the setting up of the anomalous effects.

In the electrochemical experiments the characteristics of the surface in the charging of the
metal with deuterium plays a great role. The effects in the electrochemical experiments are greater
than those in loading from the gas phase. The reason for this is probably the increased activity of
deuterium atoms which occur in the first step of loading according to the reaction:

D2O + e >- Dad + OH- (eq. 4).

The slower the following reactions (5 and 6) are, - these lead to molecular deuterium, - the
greater is the activity of the absorbed D atoms on the surface:

Dad + Dad >- D2 (eq. 5)

Dad + D2O + e >- D2 + OD- (eq. 6)

 The activity of adsorbed atoms determines the loading of the metal lattice with D atoms which
go from the surface to the interior of the lattice. In this way one can build up a super- saturation of
the lattice with D-atoms and this super saturation increases with the surface activity of the adsorbed
D. If one tried to read super saturation in the metal by increasing the pressure in the gas phase,
enormous pressures would be necessary.

In the literature it is reported that extremely long times of electrolysis are necessary before
phenomena are observed and these can give rise to the deposition of impurities on the surface of the
electrode. This gives rise in turn to a change of the overpotential in the current-potential curve (7)
and also in the analysis of the surface composition which will certainly take place on long term
electrolysis (8). Such absorbance can give rise to an inhibition of the recombination rate of the
surface atoms to the molecular product in reactions 5 and 6. In this way the activity of adsorbed
hydrogen can be increase. On the other hand, if the inhibition affects reaction 4 then the reverse
effect occurs. In fact, it is possible to think of an acceleration of reactions 5 and 6 by the impurities.
Thus, it has been shown for palladium cathodes that these contain platinum which obviously arises
by the partial dissolution of the anode. It is known that if oxygen is evolved at high rates upon an
anode there is certainly the danger of anodic dissolution. Correspondingly it is known that platinum
deposition on palladium increases the recombination and therefore decreases the activity of adsorbed
D.

Apart from the observation of neutrons, proof of the presence of the nuclear products 3
H,
3
He, and 4
He are difficult to observe because many of the experiments are carried out in open
systems, the evolved gases seldom being collected. The consumed D2O has to be replaced. In this
way one builds up impurities in the electrolyte in the cell and the products in the gas phase are lost.
 1
 Note added by JOMB: At a recent meeting at the California Edison Company, Robert Bush
of Pamona University in California revealed measurements on very thin films which, when
calculated to a per cc measurement of heat, give about 1 kW per cc.
 2
 Note added by JOMB: In particular Mike McKubre and his group at SRI have been
reporting 250-450% heat for some months. The rumor is that this is an understatement. EPRI
has decided to continue to build a practical plant for the production of energy from cold fusion
which should be completed by 1997.
 3
 Note added by JOMB: On the other hand, the well accepted Mossbauer effect surely is
already and example of the effect of a lattice upon a nuclear process.
Only a very few experiments are carried out in closed systems in which the D2 is converted to D2O
on a catalyst and re-introduced into the electrolyte (9,10) or, alternatively, the D2 which is evolved
is oxidized back to D2O (or D+
) (11).

The latter process corresponds to the anodic process in a hydrogen-oxygen fuel cell. In such
experiments the reaction products build up in the electrolyte or in the gas volumes which are
collected. This has so far only been used for tritium analysis.

The calorimetric measurements have been greatly improved. In the open cells there are still
difficulties concerning the loss of heat along with the evolved gases. Closed cells do not have this
difficulty but they are much larger in volume and are less sensitive to the measurement of heat. In
general there exists in all electrochemical cells the problem that the energy input of the cell is large
(large current densities) and must be carefully measured in order to set up a clear and sure energy
balance. The uptake of energy varies with the cell resistance and the overpotentials of the electrode.
The excess energy in most of the experiments which have been described so far is considerably less
than the energy which is being used for the electrolysis. A typical excess heat measurement amounts
to 10-20% of the energy put into the electrolysis over several hours. A few measurements have
given 100% and more. 1
 A few measurements do give 100% of heat and even more but are perhaps
somewhat doubtful. On the other hand, there were plenty of indications at the conference that some
authors were withholding their results because of patent considerations. 2

The experimental problems in the measurement of gas loading is much less well known to
me and I do not wish to comment upon it. It is noteworthy that neutron production which exceeds
the background intensity can only be obtained by warming up these samples which have been
charged at very low temperatures.


THEORETICAL PROBLEMS

The most decisive problem is the question: How can a solid body influence the course of
nuclear processes? 3
 Thus, the point is, - how can the screening of the repulsive forces between the
 4

Note added by JOMB: The experiments of Fleischmann and Pons are being carried out in
Nice with support of a Japanese group connected to Toyota.

two atomic nuclei be achieved so that successful tunnelling can occur? The second question is, how
can the pathways be altered so that they go in the direction of reaction 3 and thus allow a ratio of
106
 - 109
 for the predominance of tritium over neutrons (compare the expected 1:1 ration of nuclear
chemistry in hot plasmas). (2)

A further riddle is the absence of hard gamma radiation which should occur corresponding
to reaction 3. How can the gigantic energy of this reaction be diffused over the solid body without
emitting radiation (although weak x-rays have been seen on a photographic plate)? (6,12)

There are various attempts at theoretical interpretation (1), and some of these are really quite
far out. It has even been suggested that an unknown elementary particle is a catalyst in these
processes (13). Without sufficient material to overview the theoretical contributions I will not make
any further comments on these theories.


WHAT SHALL BE DONE?

The works which have been so far reported are works which concern individual questions.
Attempts are being made to reproduce experiments and to modify the technique. A systematic
characterization of the electrochemical and experimental conditions has not yet been carried out.
As the largest effects are being observed under the electrochemical conditions it is necessary to
concentrate on the electrochemical experiments.

Fleischmann and Pons reported in the meeting in Como concerning their experiments with
palladium alloys (probably with silver) and maintain that they have been able reproducibly to
observe large excess heats. No details of the experimental arrangements were given because of their
wish to maintain patent conditions. 4

There is also evidence that the composition of the electrolyte plays a considerable part in the
occurrence of the anomalous effects. It is absolutely essential to research the connection between
overpotential, hydrogen content, and surface characteristics of palladium or palladium alloys in a
systematic way. This could probably be carried out with light hydrogen, beginning with the
hypothesis that a very high loading of D in metals is necessary for fusion, because in respect to
loading, H and D hardly differ from each other. One could then come back later to the experiments
with D2O and with the knowledge of what has given rise to the high loading with hydrogen. In this
respect it is necessary to have a method which allows a rapid measurement of the amount of
hydrogen in the palladium. Here resistance methods are probably the best. Parallel to the
information obtained in the measurements it would be necessary to build calorimeters which have
requisite controls and work in an enclosed manner so that heat production and nuclear products can
also be observed with a minimum amount of ambiguity. The decisive proof of excess heat arising
from nuclear reactions will, of course, be the occurrence of the corresponding amount of 4
He. If this
can be confirmed, further steps for the optimization of the energy yield can be carried out.

These goals require the cooperation of scientists from various fields. One needs
electrochemists, metal scientists, particularly those with knowledge of metal hydrides, engineers for
the building of cells and the computerization of data, persons with experience in calorimetry, mass
spectroscopy, and one needs nuclear physicists for the radiation measurements. A team of this kind
should be in a position to clear up the basic situation fairly quickly. Of course, the first thing is to
confirm the facts. The fact that, in the Republic of Germany this work has been inhibited is no
longer justified. It could, later on, be regarded as a very unfortunate gap in German research when
compared with the present activity in other countries and particularly in Japan.


REFERENCES

1. M. Srinivasan, in: "Current Science," April 1991.
2. E. Storms, appears in "Fusion Technology", 1991.
3. M. Fleischmann, S.Pons & M. Hawkins, J. Electroanal. Chem. 261 (1989), 301; 263 (1989),
187.
4. C. Walling & J. Simons, J. Phys. Chem. 93 (1989), 4693.
5. M. Fleischmann, personal communication, 1990.
6. B.F. Bush, J. Lagowski, M.H. Miles, & G.S. Ostrom, J. Electroanal. Chem. 304 (1991), 171.
7. Z.B.M. Ulmann, J. Lin, J. Augustynski, F. Eli, & L. Schlapbach, J. Electroanal. Chem. 286
(1990), 257.
8. Observations of various authors at the meeting in Como.
9. N.J.C. Packham, K.L. Wolf, J.C. Wass, R.C. Kainthla, & J. O'M. Bockris, J. Electroanal.
Chem. 270 (1989), 451.
10. E. Storms & C. Talcott, Fusion Technology 17 (1990), 680.
11. F. Will, lecture at meeting in Como.
12. S. Szpak, lecture at the meeting in Como, J. Electroanal. Chem. 302 (1991), 255.
13. F. Mayer and J.R. Reitz, Fusion Technology 18 (1991), 352.