1. Introduction

Open Source Science (OSSc) is a recent development in the methodologies of scientific
investigation that departs significantly from scientific practice as it has evolved in recent
decades. OSSc is enabled by technologies of the digital revolution, particularly the Internet, and
embraces a collaborative investigative approach rather than conventional individual or small-
group research methods. OSSc grew out of Internet-supported collaborative development of
software under a paradigm known as Open Source Software (OSS) or Free/Libre OSS (FOSS or
FLOSS). Particularly successful examples of the OSS paradigm are the Linux operating system
software, Apache server software, and Open Office word processor, spreadsheet, and
presentation software.

Cold fusion (CF) is a potentially revolutionary scientific discovery in which nuclear fusion
(basically of hydrogen to helium, as in the hydrogen bomb) is achieved at non-explosive rates
and at ambient (near-earth-surface) temperatures. CF1 was announced by two research chemists2
in 1989 as a scientific breakthrough with promise of meeting most of the energy needs of
society. However, for a variety of reasons (both technical and sociological), CF was rejected by
the mainstream scientific community within a year of its announcement.

Despite this rejection, research into CF has continued under highly marginalized conditions by
a relatively small group of capable and reputable scientists. This research appears to show clear
evidence of the validity of CF phenomena. Given the potential benefit of CF for improving the
human condition, and given the continued promising research results, it seems apparent that
continued – and expanded – research is urgently needed. And with its current state of rejection
and marginalization, CF appears to be an ideal candidate for research under the OSSc paradigm,
not only because of the appeal of voluntary research contributions in the absence of funding from
conventional resources, but also because of theoretical challenges whose resolution may benefit
from the insights and perspectives of other fields besides nuclear physics.

CF and OSSc have emerged and developed in about the same timeframe – in the last 20 years
or so. Each in its own way challenges the norms of scientific culture – the sociology of science.
And each one also has the potential of revolutionizing our understanding not only of scientific
phenomena but also in how scientific research is fundamentally conducted. Successful CF/OSSc
research has the potential result not only of an important new energy source but also of
improving the way that science is performed more generally.


2. The Open Source Science Paradigm

Open Source Science is a paradigm for conducting research that differs substantially from
conventional science as it has evolved in the last few decades, particularly since World War II.
This difference is not just one of methodology and reporting, but of much more significant
characteristics of values, perspective, underlying motivations, and associated reward systems. In
the OSSc perspective, research (and the resulting knowledge) is viewed as a public good – as
belonging to the commons – and as freely accessible rather than protected by property rights.
This perspective was initially brought forth in the context of collaborative development of
computer software (OSS) and has extended into other areas, including publication of technical
literature (Open Access, OA) and scientific investigation (OSSc). Open Source in general, and
OSSc specifically, are promoted by the Creative Commons3 organization and its subsidiary, The
Science Commons4.

Origins in the Open Source Software Movement:
The OSS movement apparently began as a reaction to the high cost, and resulting
unavailability to many, of proprietary software5. The basic idea behind OSS, initiated (or at least
articulated ) by Richard Stallman is that software belongs to the public at large; i.e., to the
commons (Stallman 2007). Many projects and software products have been initiated under the
OSS paradigm6, but the Linux and Apache operating systems for individual computers and
computer servers are examples that are most frequently referenced. The advantages of the open
source approach over proprietary software development have been summarized by Raymond
(1998). The history and impact of the OSS movement are described in several sources (see, for
example, Bretthauer (2002), Fuggetta (2003), and von Krogh and von Hippel (2003)).

Two of the greatest surprises and accomplishments of the OSS movement have been the high
level of participation and number of contributions without direct monetary compensation and the
high quality of the software products, which compete very successfully with proprietary
products. The high quality is believed to be the result of the concept7 that “many heads are better
than one” – a clear demonstration that collaboration can be highly successful in the area of
software development.

A primary precept of OSSc is that knowledge is owned by the public at large – it is part of the
commons – in much the same way that software is viewed under the OSS movement. Although
this viewpoint seems rather radical in the early 21st century, with the current emphasis on
intellectual property protection through copyrights and patents, in actuality it represents a return
to traditional perspectives of scientific research. Robert Merton, the “father” of the study of the
sociology of science, advanced several precepts or norms regarding the conduct of science,
which are summarized in the acronym CUDOS and are listed in Appendix A (Merton 1942,

Communalism

Universalism

Disinterestedness

Originality8

Skepticism

These norms, which considerably pre-date the OSS movement, neatly sum up the primary
precepts of OSSc9. Within academia, for example, faculty are paid salaries (often by the public)
for teaching and guiding students (especially graduate students) and for conducting research and
publishing the results, which then become part of the commons. Emergence of the OSSc
paradigm thus represents a return to (or reinforcement of) traditional cultural attitudes toward
scientific investigation.

OSSc not only reemphasizes a traditional viewpoint toward science and knowledge as part of
the commons, but it also makes use of powerful tools, such as communication and electronic file
management functions of the Internet, to further or enhance collaboration in scientific
investigation. It also encourages, and provides the means for, the synergy of many people with
different backgrounds and perspectives to attack a problem. Such collaborative effects provide
the basis for cross-fertilization among different fields and disciplines, one of the most powerful
methods of achieving new insights into a problem area10. The effectiveness of mass collaboration
in many areas has been well summarized by several authors, including Tapscott and Williams
(2006), von Hippel (2006), and Benkler (2007).

Open Access Reporting of Research Results:
Extension of the OSS paradigm to the publication of research results (OA) apparently took
place in response to the skyrocketing cost of journal subscriptions (which were growing at a rate
three times the rate of inflation) and a growing concern of “enclosure” of knowledge through
aggressive application of copyright law and passage of new laws, such as the Digital Millennium
Copyright Act (DMCA) in the U.S. A major concern has been the economic gain being realized
by publishers who were charging high prices for literature (research papers) that was funded at
public expense and for the public good. One of the earliest movements toward OA took place as
an effort to help investigators in developing countries, where scientific literature was fast
becoming unavailable because of inability to pay high subscription costs. The OA movement,
like the OSSc paradigm, fosters the concept of knowledge as commons and represents a
verification and strengthening of the Mertonian view toward science and the reporting of
scientific investigation.

Motivations for Open Source Creativity:
Scientific discovery, it seems, occurs in two primary ways – through individual insight or
inspiration and through collaborative sharing of ideas and perspectives in trying to solve a
problem or meet an objective11. Creative people seem also to be motivated by two forces –
private gain and community contribution (as well as the pleasure of artistic expression).
Economists in general focus on the private interest motivations and appear to have been
surprised by the success of the OSS movement without evidence of compensation by the
contributors. A number of studies have been published on the seeming mystery of OSS
motivating factors (see, for example, Lerner and Tirole (2005), von Hippel and von Krogh
(2003), and Madey Free and Tynan (2005)). Other investigators appear to display a more
balanced understanding of human motivation and emphasize the social structure and implicit
rewards of uncompensated contributions (Crowston and Howison (2005), Edwards (2003),
Osterloh and Rota (2007), Zeitlyn (2003)).

The motivation for OSSc participation comes less from economic drivers and personal gain
motives and more from the intellectual satisfaction provided, the perceived gain in reputation,
and the promise of improving the human condition. The rewards are therefore less tangible and
remunerative and more intellectual and community driven in nature.

OSSc may therefore provide the opportunity to achieve a better balance not only between the
private and public motivations of creative people but also between the two avenues of scientific
progress by individuals and group collaboration.

Intellectual Property Issues:
Not surprisingly, IP issues are closely related to the motivating forces of inventive people.
Those who are more socially motivated will be attracted to OSSc contribution, whereas those
with a private interest motivation will seek IP protection for their work under copyright or patent
law. One of the salient developments of the OSS movement was the concept of using copyright
law to protect the open access status of OSS. In this development, contributors establish a
copyright (called “Copyleft”), which allows others to freely copy and modify software but with
certain restrictions such as attribution to the software developer and “viral” properties – the
provisions of the Copyleft apply to all software derived from the Copylefted software. The
Copyleft concept and its application in the Gnu General Public License (GPL) are well described
by Mustonen (2003) and on the Free Software Foundation website12. A similar or parallel effort
to protect OSS under patent law has been initiated, at least for Linux, by the Linux Foundation13
and the Open Invention14 initiative. The copyright and patent issues for OSSc apparently have
not yet been addressed to the extent that they have been for OSS.

Challenges to Open Source Science Success:
Although OSSc represents a constructive return to the traditional values and practices of
science, and adds significantly to scientific practice through the power of the Internet, it is not a
panacea. The issues around treating knowledge as a common good have been delineated by Hess
and Ostrom (2007) in three categories – studying, protecting and building the knowledge
commons. Specific issues addressed include the growth and preservation of the knowledge
commons, intellectual property concerns and countering “enclosure” of information, and
application of commons concepts to published papers (OA), science (OSSc), collective action,
and economics. An urgent concern for OSSc and science in general is the recent trend to
privatization of public knowledge (Bollier 2002). For OSSc specifically, Schweik (2007)
identifies four areas needing urgent attention:
How to license digital material besides software. Perhaps broaden the Copyleft concept to apply
to other forms of intellectual property.

How to achieve success in the context of current incentive structures. Modify incentives and
develop a “next-generation” e-journal.

How to govern collaboration under the OSSc paradigm and develop and implement an effective
“commons governance structure”.

How to finance projects under the OSSc paradigm. Rely on voluntarism and develop alternate
financing schemes for paper publishing.

This author also points out that the main difference between scientific and software OSSc
projects is the larger variety of participants in science projects. The central question for
successful application of the OSS paradigm to science (OSSc) is the provision of adequate
incentives for the broad spectrum of potential participants.


3. Cold Fusion Background

If it proves to be real, CF will be good news for the welfare of humanity because it holds the
promise of providing abundant supplies of energy from nuclear sources at temperatures close to
the surface of the earth and with little or no associated harmful radiation.

Cold fusion apparently achieves nuclear fusion at ambient temperatures by somehow
overcoming the natural repulsion of protons (the Coulomb barrier) in the nuclei of hydrogen
atoms so that they fuse, with the production of helium and release of energy.

For a variety of reasons, CF was not fully enough substantiated to be accepted by mainstream
science during the year after its announcement. Not only was it not accepted, but it was also held
up as a premier example of how science should not be done. It became the subject of a number of
books and papers as “bad science,” “voodoo science”, and even fraudulent science.

Despite this negative outcome, a number of capable and reputable researchers continued their
investigations – and continued to achieve positive results – in the years after 1990. For example,
a recent CF publication (Storms 7007) tabulated some 184 confirmations of excess heat
(indicating nuclear fusion) from 1989 to 2004.

The situation with CF – continued affirmative results without general acceptance by the
scientific community – has been characterized as “undead science” (Simon 2002). The cycle
typically experienced by radical new discoveries has been well characterized by Kuhn (1986)
and consists of initial rejection, followed by marginalization and derision, and then by eventual
acceptance, with major advance in the body of scientific knowledge. If it proves to be “real” CF
may be poised for vindication and resurgence as a legitimate field of science (see, for example,
Beaudette (2002), Krivit and Winocur (2004), and Storms (2007)).

Current Research Conditions:
Cold fusion researchers, in spite of (or perhaps because of) the rejection and marginalization of
the field, have formed a relatively close-knit (although often fractious) community that has its
own methods of conduct, communication, critique and reporting of research results,. The
Internet, which emerged to national prominence and widespread usage in about the same
timeframe as marginalized CF research has continued, has played a key role in the success
achieved in that research. Continued and expanded use of the Internet will be a major ingredient
of support of CF research in the future.

The ways that CF research is conducted are greatly influenced, naturally, by the initial fate of
CF and its continued rejection and marginalization. Although a few CF investigators hold
prestigious academic or research positions at well-established organizations, much research is
conducted at home laboratories and similar small facilities that are dedicated solely to CF
research. In the absence of reasonable levels of funding, many of the phenomena that are known
to need systematic and thorough investigation with costly lab equipment go unattended.
Development of adequate explanations (theories) for observed phenomena is hindered by
insufficient experimental data. Without adequate data to “bound” theoretical explanation,
theories proliferate, and it is difficult to determine which ones are possible or likely and which
are extremely unlikely or impossible.

Communication and Reporting: Existing Open Source Methods:
The CF research community has developed its own methods and tools for maintaining
professional relationships and sharing results. Many of these methods closely resemble or mimic
the conventions of mainstream science. They entail extensive use of the Internet, so the
community is well positioned to take increased advantage of digital technologies and tools. The
salient communication and reporting methods currently used are described below.

Professional Organization. The International Society for Condensed Matter Nuclear Science
(ISCMNS) is the accepted CF-dedicated professional organization. According to its website15,
the ISCMNS mission is “to promote the understanding, development and application of
Condensed Matter Nuclear Science for the benefit of the public”. It achieves this mission “by
organizing scientific meetings, facilitating communication and collaboration between scientists,
[and] publishing and distributing results”. The organization was registered in England in 2006 as
a not-for-profit company. It is governed by a constitution and executive committee, and it
maintains a code of conduct for its members.
Conferences. The CF research community presents papers on theory and experimental results
in mainstream science conferences where such opportunities can be found – for example, a
“Condensed Matter” session at the American Physical Society (APS) annual meeting in March.

Because of its marginalization, CF has also been the topic of dedicated conferences
(International Conferences on Cold Fusion, ICCF) since 1991, with meetings held in various
countries where CF research is conducted about every 18 months. The 12th and 13th conferences
were held in Yokohama, Japan16 in late 2005 and in Dagomys, Russia in the summer of 200717,
respectively. ICCF-14 is scheduled for August 2008 in Washington, D.C.18. The ICCF
conferences, as noted, are held under the auspices of the ISCMNS.

Peer-Reviewed Journal. As in the case of conferences, CF researchers publish peer-reviewed
papers in mainstream scientific journals – where their papers are not rejected outright because of
the topic. In response to a strong need for additional publication outlet, ISCMNS has recently
initiated a CF-dedicated peer-reviewed journal, the Journal of Condensed Matter Nuclear
Science19 (JCMNS). This journal is copyrighted as an open-access publication that requires no
special permission for downloading for non-commercial use or for teaching purposes. The first
issue, which came out in April 2007, had 12 research articles.

Publications Repository. A website entitled LENR-CANR20 provides an online library with a
bibliography of more than 3500 journal papers, books and news articles related to CF. Included
in the library are more than 500 scientific papers in PDF (Acrobat) format. The website also
includes links to two important electronic books (described in the next section) that can be
downloaded without charge. LENR-CANR is maintained by Jed Rothwell and is not currently
sanctioned by ISCMNS or other professional society, although the ISCMNS website does
provide a link to LENR-CANR.

Electronic Books. Three e-books are available on LENR-CANR for free downloading, as
noted above. Jed Rothwell’s “Cold Fusion and the Future” (2007) is intended to “show that with
cold fusion we can accomplish marvelous things (p. 1). The fourth edition, published in April
2007, has 188 pages. It has an introduction, a description of CF, an outline of how CF will
change society, and a review of specific technologies that will be changed by CF. Edmund
Storms’ “A Student’s Guide to Cold Fusion” (2003) is more technically oriented, including eight
chapters that provide an overview, describe the production of anomalous energy and nuclear
products, delineate the “nuclear active environment” and the behavior of palladium, and explain
the Pons-Fleischmann effect and a possible theory for the nuclear reactions. Beaudette’s “Excess
Heat – Why Cold Fusion Prevailed (2nd Ed.)21” is one of the most important reference works in
the cold fusion and is also now available online on LENR-CANR.

Newsletters. The best-known and most complete CF newsletter is “New Energy Times”
(Krivit 2007), which is produced bimonthly by the New Energy Institute, with Steven Krivit as
editor and publisher. It is not yet sanctioned by ISCMNS or other professional society, but is
widely recognized in the CF research community as an authoritative and reliable information
source. The website22 where the newsletter can be downloaded has a highly protagonistic slant
and contains many other references and links in addition to the newsletter. The New Energy
Times website and newsletter are particularly valuable for an introduction to the field for
newcomers, both interested researchers and the general public.

E-mail Thread in CMNS Google Group. An e-mail thread for CF researchers has been
established in Google Groups by Haiko Leitz23. Participation is by invitation – new members
must be recommended by a current member before being added to the list by Leitz. The CMNS
list is quite active, typically with 12 to 20 postings daily. The subjects are quite varied and range
from highly theoretical exchanges to detailed experimental results to the problems of
marginalization and public perception. Many of the e-mails provide links to websites of interest
or to support a point being made or a position being taken.

Video Clips. Several video CF-related clips are available in services such as Google Video and
YouTube. Topics addressed include promotional pieces to further the “CF cause” and excerpts
from meetings and conferences. For example, a video of the March 23, 1989 press conference
where CF was dramatically announced is available24. Another video25 covers a presentation by
Glenn Seaborg – “Cold Fusion Presidential Briefing [1989]” – in which it is admitted that the
negative CF findings of a U.S. DOE Energy Research Advisory Board in 1989 were fore-
ordained.

Researcher Personal Websites. A number of active CF researchers and other interested parties
maintain personal websites that are designed to provide valuable information and promote the
CF case. Examples are the websites of Edmund Storms26, Melvin Miles27, Ludwik Kowalski28,
and Brian Josephson29.

Periodic Special-Purpose Websites. CF researchers periodically create websites or webpages
to support particular experiments or other initiatives. An example is an online laboratory
notebook30 that is maintained by EarthTech International, Inc. for experiments performed in their
highly sophisticated calorimeter (humorously termed MOAC – Mother of All Calorimeters).
This webpage contains a daily chronology when experiments are underway and screenshot
images from LabView, the software used to record data from the calorimeter.


4. Cold Fusion Research under the Open Source Science Paradigm

Cold fusion research as it is conducted, critiqued, and reported under its current marginalized
state may benefit from the perspectives, methods and tools of the OSSc paradigm. OSSc offers
potential advantages to the CF research effort in four main areas:
Enhanced research through increased collaboration
More options and better clarity on intellectual property topics
Improved communications and reporting of research through expanded use of the Internet
Increased accessibility of CF information for those new to the field and to improve prospects
for acceptance into mainstream science
Cold fusion research as it is conducted today already has many of the characteristics of
research under the OSS paradigm, such as performance of low-budget research by many
investigators and at many locations. To the extent that the OSSc paradigm may be applied to CF
research, it must be from a standpoint of “incremental value” to the current practices of the CF
investigator community. Since ISCMNS has been established as the primary CF-focused
professional organization, it would be the natural sponsor of OSSc-based enhancements.

Enhanced Collaboration:
One of the primary contributions that OSSc can make to the CF research effort is to provide
the means for increased collaboration, particularly by those having expertise in other fields.
Because of the marginalized state of CF, there appears to be a highly-developed sense of
community among the active researchers, and there seems to be a strong ethic of collaboration.
Although the cooperation appears to be more pervasive than in “normal” scientific investigation,
current methods do not specifically emphasize sharing of ideas and cross-fertilization from other
scientific fields.

Two aspects of CF research may somewhat limit the degree of cross-disciplinary
collaboration– the highly advanced understanding of nuclear physics required for formulating
reasonable theories, and the sophisticated laboratory skills required to achieve successful
experiments. Nevertheless, a more collaborative approach may have excellent potential for new
insights emerging from the perspectives of other fields. Under the OSSc approach, a mechanism
and associated guidelines will be provided to state the CF research and theoretical issues clearly,
make them widely available and easy to respond to, and receive, evaluate and incorporate the
input received.

Intellectual Property Considerations:
A strong Mertonian ethic has prevailed to date within the CF research community. As CF
emerges from its rejected state, the uneasy balance between openness and enclosure, between
sharing knowledge as property of the commons and seeking personal gain through intellectual
property measures, may be significantly disturbed. Given the potential importance of CF as a
universal energy source, it may be in the public interest to keep as much knowledge of the
phenomenon as possible readily available as open source. At the same time, the interests of
investigators must be protected not only to maintain incentives for CF research, but also to
maintain the integrity of information as it is developed and published.

Under the CF/OSSc paradigm, both the public interest and the private interests of CF
investigators need to be addressed. The options available for copyright of published papers,
including the use of Copyleft and the GNU General Public License31, will be described, and links
to websites that provide more information and tools will be included. Similarly for patent
alternatives, CF-specific information will be provided so that investigators can make informed
decisions.

Research Communication and Reporting:
Although the methods currently used by the CF research community have many open access
features, additional measures are available under the OSSc paradigm to enhance development,
communication and reporting of research results. The best approach to optimizing methods for
communication using Internet tools and technologies is to examine what’s currently being done,
infer the requirements that are being met, and recommend improved methods. Examples of
Internet tools that are available to enhance communication and reporting are shown in Table 1.

Public Access to Information:
Owing to its rejected and marginalized status, CF has a unique challenge of communication to
potentially interested researchers and the public as a whole. Much information on the history,
current status and new developments is available from a variety of sources, especially websites.
But considerable effort is required to locate these sources, evaluate them for particular strengths,
and classify them for their utility to the CF field and in what topical area.

Under the CF/OSSc paradigm, emphasis will be placed on developing a clear statement of the
“CF case” in a mildly promotional tone and making it easily accessible. The various sources of
information – books, websites, papers, repositories, etc. – will be identified and categorized to
facilitate the task of newcomers to the field in “coming up the learning curve.” The needs of both
the general public – for general information for making an informed decision about CF – and
potentially interested sophisticated researchers, who need a more in-depth introduction to the
field, will be addressed.

Table 1. Internet Tools for Communication and Reporting

Summary of Current and Proposed Solutions:
Table 2 provides a summary of the inferred CF research and communication requirements
along with a listing of current and proposed CF/OSSc methods of meeting the requirements. This
summary provides the basis for a specific implementation plan, which is presented in preliminary
form in Section 5.

Table 2. Current Methods and Proposed OSSc Approaches for CF Research and Communication


5. Enhanced Application of Open Source Science to Cold Fusion Research

Implementation of OSSc enhancements to the current CF research paradigm will make full use
of the functions of the Internet. The website of ISCMNS, the accepted CF professional
organization, will be the assumed platform for supporting the CF/OSSc implementation.

Website Organization and Structure:
The ISCMNS website, as modified to support CF/OSSc research, will (like most websites)
consist of a homepage and a number of topical webpages. The website will be set up to meet the
CF/OSSc requirements as set forth in Table 4-2, using the best features of the ORS example.

The homepage will be designed for the general public but will also fully support the
sophisticated needs of the CF research community. It will provide high-level information about
CF in general and about ISCMNS specifically. A clean, uncluttered appearance will help ensure
public interest. Hyperlinks to the topical webpages and other CF websites will be used
extensively to avoid “information overload” on the homepage.

The individual webpages will be developed by CF topical area as described in Table 4-2 and
will range from descriptive and promotional pages for the general public and researchers new to
the field to highly technical forums and download facilities to help researchers to collaborate on
such topics as theoretical underpinnings of CF and experimental designs and results. The
following webpages are expected to be needed (at a minimum) for the revised ISCMNS website:

Basic Non-Technical CF Descriptions. For the general public; mildly protagonistic in tone.
Includes CF professional acknowledgements and links to the many existing CF websites.

News and Scheduled Events. For both the public and CF researchers, especially ISCMNS
members. Includes a calendar and links to other important newsletter websites as well as
schedules and agendas of upcoming professional meetings.

Professional Contacts and Group Members. For ISCMNS members and other CF researchers.
Purpose is to enhance networking among CF interested parties and contributors.

Professional Real-Time Exchanges. For the CF research community. Provides information on
current GougleGroup e-mail exchanges, including conditions for participation.

Collaborative Publication. Contains drafts of technical papers, white papers, and other
manuscripts for collaborative development and authorship. Designed to be a close parallel to
collaborative software development under OSS paradigm. Would facilitate contributions from
researchers in other fields.

Intellectual Property Information. Provides an overview of copyright and patent alternatives.
Focuses on choices that support the OSSc paradigm, such as Copyleft and open patents.

Shared Software and Other Tools. Set up for posting of researchers’ work products that may
have utility for other members of the CF community. Designed to enhance collaboration in the
research effort and increase efficiency (avoid “re-inventing the wheel”). May also include
reference to webpage on intellectual property.

Publication of Peer-Reviewed Papers. Currently the Journal of Condensed Matter Nuclear
Science, which is posted on the ISCMNS website. Provides a means for more formal peer review
of individual papers than the Collaborative Publication webpage described above (although
works from that webpage could “graduate” to peer-reviewed status by the collaborative authors.)
Publications Repository. Provides a link to (and possibly mirrors) the existing LENR-CANR
website. Also contains relevant mainstream science publications to CF research that are not
directly CF-related (the focus of the LENR-CANR website.) ISCMNS should be prepared to
adopt the repository if or when necessary.

Monitoring Changes and Quick Glance. Designed to keep CF researchers up to date on current
developments in an automated fashion. Upon individual request or consent, may include RSS
feed functionality for revisions to the ISCMNS website.

Financial Support. Provides explanation of the CF/OSSc model and how it is funded, as well as
instructions on how to make contributions.

Financial Support:
The issues around financial support of OSSc initiatives were well articulated by Schweik
(2007), apparently based in part on experience with the ORS project described above. The main
points of this review are summarized as follows:
Financial support must be carefully addressed for OSSc projects to be successful.
Support must be considered in two areas – the time and effort involved in contributing to the
OSSc project, and the required administrative and collaborative infrastructure.
Project financing in the past has come from seven types of revenue – government subsidies,
philanthropy, corporate consortia, corporate investment, venture capital and investment banking,
user or participant donations, and a hybrid or mix of the first six sources.
The costs for the time and effort for contributions may be covered by sources that are implicit
in the OSSc paradigm and Mertonian science in general – donations from contributors who gain
their livelihood by other means.
Administrative and infrastructure costs may be recovered in a similar manner to that used for
OA publication costs, including compensation for ancillary support services, subscription
models, and author-pays-to-publish models.
For the CF/OSSc project, the ISCMNS organization could establish a subsidiary foundation to
control risk to the organization and to receive and manage funds.

Management and Approval Process:
Decisions on the overall content and structure of the website will be subject to the approval of
the ISCMNS Executive Committee. In addition, the Committee will be responsible for approving
the methods of managing the website and the process for approval of specific content at a level
lower than the Committee. More than likely a website manager will need to be designated on a
voluntary (perhaps rotating) basis or, preferably, on a compensated basis, at least part time.


6. Summary

Cold fusion is a radical new development in physics that may benefit humankind substantially,
if it proves to be true, as a new source of low-cost energy. Despite being rejected and
marginalized early in its history, CF continues to be actively researched and still holds promise
for eventual success. Open source software is a radical new developmental method that is
already having a beneficial effect on the creation of new software through voluntary,
collaborative effort. The OSS revolution is made possible by the powerful new tools and
functions of the Internet that support dispersed collaborative software creation.

Extension of the OSS paradigm to scientific research (OSSc) is in many ways a reinforcement
of open traditions of science as expressed in Merton’s scientific norms (CUDOS). But OSSc also
represents a major advance in collaborative scientific research through the power of the Internet,
as is the case for OSS. The OSSc paradigm has already been applied successfully to “real-world”
scientific projects and appears to be readily applicable to CF research efforts.

CF research may benefit in many ways from the systematic collaborative approach of the
OSSc paradigm. Successful application of the OSSc paradigm to CF research would result not
only in a further demonstration of the flexibility and power of the paradigm, but would also
enhance CF prospects – so that this potential energy-producing phenomenon could be validated
and developed for practical uses. Humanity as a whole would be the primary beneficiary of both
the success of the OSSc paradigm and of development of CF as a major new source of
inexpensive energy.


7. References

Beaudette, Charles G. Excess Heat: Why Cold Fusion Research Prevailed. 2nd ed. South Bristol,
Maine: Oak Grove Press, 2002.
Benkler, Yochai. The Wealth of Networks – How Social Production Transforms Markets and
Freedom. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2007. Online. Available:
http://www.benkler.org/Benkler_Wealth_Of_Networks.pdf. Accessed: November 2007.
Bollier, David. Silent Theft – the Private Plunder of Our Common Wealth. New York: Routledge,
Bretthauer, David. “Open Source Software: A History.” Information Technology and Libraries
2101., 2002. Online. Available:
http://news.ala.org/ala/lita/litapublications/ital/2101bretthauer.cfm. Accessed: November 2007.
Crowston, Kevin, and James Howison. The Social Structure of Open Source Software
Development.” First Monday, vol. 10, no. 2 (February 2005).
Edwards, Kasper. “Epistemic Communities, Situated Learning and Open Source Software
Development.” 2002. Online. Available: http://pascal.case.unibz.it/retrieve/3278/kasperedwards-
ec.pdf. Accessed: November 2007.
Fuggetta, Alfonso. “Open Source Software – An Evaluation.” The Journal of Systems and
Software, vol. 66 (2003), pp 77-90. Online. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science?_ob=PublicationURL&_tockey=%23TOC%235651%232
003%23999339998%23432790%23FLA%23&_cdi=5651&_pubType=J&_auth=y&_acct=C000
050221&_version=1&_urlVersion=0&_userid=10&md5=6ba55c7f8e7a7e7c444ae9a1581e1f96.
Accessed: November 2007.
Hess, Charlotte, and Elinor Ostrom, ed. Understanding Knowledge as a Commons – from Theory
to Practice. Cambridge, Massachusetts, The MIT Press, 2007.
Huizenga, John R. Cold Fusion: the Scientific Fiasco of the Century. Rochester, New York:
University of Rochester Press, 1992.
Krivit, Steven B. and Nadine Winocur. The Rebirth of Cold Fusion: Real Science, Real Hope,
Real Energy: Los Angeles, California: Pacific Oaks Press, 2004.
Krivit, Steven B., Editor and Publisher. New Energy Times – The Leader in News and
Information on Low Energy Nuclear Reactions. San Rafael, CA: New Energy Institute, Inc.
Online. Available: http://www.newenergytimes.com. Accessed: November 2007.
Kuhn, Thomas. The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press, 1986.
Lerner, Josh and Jean Tirole. “The Economics of Technology Sharing: Open Source and
Beyond.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 19, no. 2 (Spring 2005), pp 99-120. Online.
Available: http://www.atypon-link.com/AEAP/doi/abs/10.1257/0895330054048678. Accessed:
November 2007.
Madey, Gregory, Vincent Freeh, and Renee Tynan. “Modeling the Free/Open Source Software
Community: a Quantitative Investigation.” In Free/Open Software Development, ed. Stefan
Koch. Hershey, PA: IGI Publishing., 2005.
Merton, Robert K. The Sociology of Science – Theoretical and Empirical Investigations: Chicago,
IL: The University of Chicago Press, 1968.
Merton, Robert. “The Normative Structure of Science” In The Sociology of Science – Theoretical
and Empirical Investigations, ed. Robert K. Merton Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago
Press, 1968. Originally published as Merton 1942.
Merton, Robert. “Science and Technology in a Democratic Order”. Journal of Legal and
Political Sociology, vol 1 (1942), pp 115-126.
Mustonen, Mikko. “Copyleft – the Economics of Linux and Other Open Source Software.”
Information Economics and Policy, v14 (2003), pp. 99-121. Online. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science?_ob=PublicationURL&_tockey=%23TOC%235872%232
003%23999849998%23408123%23FLA%23&_cdi=5872&_pubType=J&_auth=y&_acct=C000
050221&_version=1&_urlVersion=0&_userid=10&md5=532e0c5abb6c2c4077067b93bfc7d5d9.
Accessed: November 2007.
Osterloh, Margit, and Sandra Rota. “Open Source Software Development – Just another Case of
Collective Invention?” Research Policy, vol. 36 (2007), pp. 157-171. Online. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science?_ob=ArticleURL&_udi=B6V77-4MV71D4-
1&_user=10&_coverDate=03%2F31%2F2007&_rdoc=1&_fmt=&_orig=search&_sort=d&view
=c&_acct=C000050221&_version=1&_urlVersion=0&_userid=10&md5=f7c1b65f38ae452e347
d6d4b41881e65. Accessed: November 2007
Paneth, Fritz, and Kurt Peters. “On the Transmutation of Hydrogen into Helium.’ Ber. d.
DeutschenChem. Ges. vol. 59 (1926), p. 2039 (in German)
Park, Robert L. Voodoo Science – the Road from Foolishness to Fraud. New York: Oxford
University Press, 2000.
Raymond, Eric. “The Cathedral and the Bazaar.” First Monday, vol. 3, no. 3 (March, 1998).
Online. Available: http://www.firstmonday.org/issues/issue3-3/raymond/. Accessed: November
Rothwell, Jed. Cold Fusion and the Future. LENR-CANR.org. 4th Edition, April 2007. Online.
Available: http://lenr-canr.org/acrobat/RothwellJcoldfusiona.pdf. Accessed: November 2007.
Schweik, Charles M. “Free/Open-Source Software as a Framework for Establishing Commons in
Science.” In Understanding Knowledge as a Commons – from Theory to Practice, ed. Charlotte
Hess and Elinor Ostrom. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press, 2007.
Schweik, Charles M., and J. Morgan Grove. “Fostering Open-Source Research Via a World
Wide Web System.” Public Administration and Management: An Interactive Journal, 2000.
Online. Available: http://www. *. Accessed: November 2007.
Schweik, Charles, Alexander Stepanov, and J. Morgan Grove. “The Open Research System: A
Web-based Metadata and Data Repository for Collaborative Research.” Computers and
Electronics in Agriculture, vol. 47 (2005), pp. 221-241. Online. Available: http://www-
unix.oit.umass.edu/~cschweik/pdfs/COMPAG2005.pdf. Accessed: November 2007
Simon, Bart. Undead Science: Science Studies and the Afterlife of Cold Fusion. New Brunswick,
New Jersey: Rutgers University Press, 2002.
Stallman, Richard. What is GNU?. Online. Available: http://www.gnu.org. Accessed: November
Storms, Edmund. A Student's Guide to Cold Fusion. LENR-CANR.org, 2003. Online. Available:
http://www.lenr-canr.org/acrobat/StormsEastudentsg.pdf . Accessed: November 2007.
Storms, Edmund. Science of Low Energy Nuclear Reaction: A Comprehensive Compilation of
Evidence and Explanations about Cold Fusion. Singapore: World Scientific Publishing, 2007.
Tapscott, Don. Wikinomics – How Mass Collaboration Changes Everything. New York:
Portfolio (a Member of the Penguin Group), 2006.
Taubes, Gary. Bad Science – the Short Life and Weird Times of Cold Fusion. New York,
Random House, 1993.
von Hippel, Eric, and Georg von Krogh. “Open Source Software and the ‘Private-Collective’
Innovation Model: Issues for Organization Science.” Organization Science, vol. 14, no. 2
(March-April 2003), p. 209-223. Online. Available:
http://web.ebscohost.com.ezproxy.lib.utexas.edu/ehost/results?vid=2&hid=102&sid=0c4d7fc7-
9d1e-4764-8f89-f55e6a2eb735%40sessionmgr102. Accessed: November 2007.
von Hippel, Eric. Democratizing Innovation. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2006. Online.
Available: http://web.mit.edu/evhippel/www/books.htm. Accessed: November 2007.
von Krogh, Georg, and Eric von Hippel. “Special Issue on Open Source Software Development.”
Research Policy, vol. 32 (2003), pp. 1149-1157. Online. Available: http:// . Accessed: November
Zeitlyn, David. “Gift Economies in the Development of Open Source Software: Anthropological
Reflections.” Research Policy, vol. 32 (2003), pp. 1287-1291. Online. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science?_ob=ArticleURL&_udi=B6V77-48BC22V-
1&_user=10&_coverDate=07%2F31%2F2003&_rdoc=1&_fmt=&_orig=search&_sort=d&view
=c&_acct=C000050221&_version=1&_urlVersion=0&_userid=10&md5=f86f24e944d97ce2f49
3d476bf9d0d4f. Accessed: November 2007.


Appendix A
The following amplification of Merton’s CUDOS has been posted on the Internet by Mercer
University.

Communalism – The findings of academic science are public knowledge rather than private
knowledge. Secrecy is prohibited in the sense that it cannot carry weight or be given credit in
scientific discourse. Dishonesty is not tolerated and mutual, personal trust is the norm.
Findings are accepted as primary literature in the public record only as a result of peer review.

Universalism in science has two faces. Contributions to science can not be excluded because
of race, nationality, religion, social status, gender, sexual preference, or other irrelevant
criteria (i.e., science is multicultural); science strives to be a meritocracy; the scientific
community attempts to be democratic and fair to its citizens. Empirical ‘facts’ have to be
consensible and the scientific ‘theories’ that interpret them have to be consensual; the
categories of “fact” (representation of experience), “taxonomy” (classification of facts), and
“theory” (explanation of the classification) have to be shared among the scientists.

Disinterestedness – Objectivity is an attempt to separate the political, religious, economic
personal vested interests of scientists of from their findings. All reference to economic,
political, religious or other social interests is routinely and systematically excluded. Scientists
are motivated by the same things that motivate non-scientists, but their work must reflect
their disinterestedness in any particular outcome. They must be open to conclusions that are
most consistent with their results.

Originality – Scientists are self-reliant, independent thinkers who are trained to be original;
whether choosing a research question, deciding on an approach to address it, or finding a way
to convince others of their findings, scientists must display novelty in order to gain maximum
credit; when they publish, something about the research has to be new; thus, freedom or
independence is a necessity in science (in the academy we call it “academic freedom”); also,
the right to dissent (see below) is absolutely critical; this need for originality explains the
emphasis on research rather than, say, scholarship and the drive towards specialization;
research areas (requiring projects and proposals) have to be formulated and in some sense
discovered.

Skepticism is an attitude of questioning and doubt, that defers judgment until supporting
evidence is available. It is sometimes confused with cynicism. Scrutiny of research claims is
a hallmark of good science. The scientific culture is an institutionalized context for
argumentation. Peer review allows the most important moment for skepticism to be exercised
and is the key institution of the scientific culture; this allows scientists to be held accountable
to a community, rather than a superior authority.
(See website at: http://sci.mercer.edu/handouts/mertonian_norms.htm)
