INTRODUCTION

Considerable heat was liberated from the palladium-deuterium (Pd-D) system by Stanley Pons and Martin Fleischmann. (1) As conventional chemical or physical
processes could not account for the substantial heat, the
heat mechanism was proposed to be nuclear fusion of
deuterium in the palladium (Pd) bulk. The fusion byproducts reported to date have been minimal, variable,
inconsistent with theory, or non-existent. Anyway, the
heat mechanism in cold fusion has not been identified
with certainty. 

This matter may be resolved by classical means if
we recognize that specific energy terms, and associated
work, were neglected in the study of cold fusion. Considerable strain energy is stored in metals and alloys
when processed from the ore. The energy balance is
disturbed when cracks nucleate, grow, and propagate
within the bulk. Deuterium induces and propagates cracks
in palladium and other metals and alloys. The sudden
discharge of fracture energy during crack propagation
generates considerable heat. The heat produced by the
work-of-fracture can be substantial and can account for
the excess enthalpy reported in cold fusion experiments.
The maximum amount of heat from the process is also
calculated and is shown to be finite. When all energy
terms are considered, including the substantial energy
required to process the palladium electrodes from the ore
or to recycle the cracked electrode samples, the break
even in cold fusion is found to be much less than 100%,
and not t000% or, the expected, one million percent
reported by the original experimenters. This paper also
demonstrates that pa


2. THE EFFECT OF MICROCRACKS 

Metals and alloys contain many microcracks in the
bulk. The fine cracks cause considerable reduction in the
theoretical cohesive strength of materials. This is demonstrated in the well-known Griffith theory (2) which
explains why the strength of materials is orders of magnitude less than the theoretical values. The measured
strength is the theoretical value less the effect of the
microcracks. Cracks induced and propagated by deuterium in the palladium bulk have the same effect of strength
reduction. The energy terms associated with the strength
reduction of palladium in deuterium, for example, must
be considered in the overall energy balance of the cold
fusion experiments. This can be done by measuring the
strength of the palladium electrodes before and after exposure to the deuterium or hydrogen environments, and
calculating the corresponding energy.


3. DEUTERIUM AND HYDROGEN EMBRITTLEMENT 

Before we calculate the amount of heat that can be
liberated by the work-of-fracture, relevant characteristics
of deuterium- and hydrogen-induced cracks in metals are
cited. Hydrogen-induced failure is known as hydrogen
embrittlement, and extensive database is available on the
subject. (3) Deuterium embrittlement is similar to hydrogen embrittlement, but the embrittling effect of deuterium is greater than that of hydrogen, in some cases by
about 30%. (4) 

Deuterium-induced cracks propagate discontinuously. This suggests a zipper mechanism, where cracks
nucleate, grow, propagate, and are then stopped by some
obstacle in the material, only to repeat the cycle again.
The grain boundary is the most likely obstacle to the
continuous propagation of intergranular (along the grain
boundary) and transgranular (across the grain) cracks. 

Embrittlement can proceed without externally-applied loads, but this does not mean that loads are not
present. Forces are provided by the residual stress in the
material and by the embrittlement mechanisms, such as,
dislocations interaction, hydride or molecular precipitates, etc. The primary mechanism for crack growth and
propagation is the stress concentration at the tip of the
crack and the strain energy associated with the very high
stresses. Embrittlement is more influenced by the microstructure of the material than by the kinetics of transport of hydrogen or deuterium in the lattice. For example,
the final stage of crack propagation happens at such fast
speeds, with which hydrogen or deuterium transport cannot compete. 


4. EXCESS HEAT CONTENT, EXCESS ENTHALPY

A significant amount of heat was liberated from the
palladium-deuterium system in the Pons-Fleischmann
experiments: "'4 MJ cm -3 of electrode volume. ''(1). The
surplus heat is not explainable by conventional chemical
or physical processes. The excess enthalpy, however,
can be shown to be the result of coversion of the mechanical energy of fracture into heat. 

Consider the typical crack geometry shown in Fig.
1. A complex triaxial state of stress exists near the crack
tip. In an elasto-plastic material, such as palladium, many
layers of atoms are disturbed in the vicinity of a growing
crack. As the crack grows, the surface energy is proportional to the crack length, c. The strain energy increases as c a (ai'ea of disturbed atoms indicated by shaded
area). The relationship between strain energy, surface
energy, and fracture energy during the growth and propagation of a crack is shown in Fig. 2, where Cc is the
critical Griffith crack length. Below co, crack growth is
stable and the system consumes energy. Beyond the critical length, considerable work (of fracture) is done, and
crack growth is rapid and can, sometimes, be explosive.
The work done can be estimated from the Griffith equation, where s is the stress, and E is the modulus of elasticity,
for Pd 1.23 • 1011 N/m 2. It is not necessary to include
nonlinear terms in the modified Griffith equations as the
simplified equation is sufficient to determine the order
of magnitude of heat that can be generated by the fracture work, or to calculate how millions of joules may be
liberated from a small palladium volume. To calculate
the work-of-fracture, we must first examine the state of
stress at the tip of the crack.  Fig. 1. Many layers of atoms are disturbed near a crack tip. 
Fig. 2. Interaction of surface, strain, and fracture energy terms
during crack growth and propagation. 

Geometric discontinuities in materials produce stress
concentration near crack tips. A theoretical stress concentration factor, Kz, for an elliptic hole, of length 2c (c
is the length of a crack) and width 2b, is given by
The stress concentration factor for a crack several angstroms wide and several microns long is greater than 1000.
As the atomic bonds at the crack tip break, the stress
concentration effect is transferred to the next bonds, and
so on. The stress concentration for a microcrack (2 microns long and 1 angstrom tip radius) was modeled and
computed at about 200. (5/The stress concentration effect
in the vicinity of a microcrack is insensitive to the method
of load application, i.e., whether the load is applied
externally or internally. In the calculation of the fracture
energy, the more conservative stress concentration factor
of 200 is used in this paper. Yet, to calculate the fracture
energy, the number of cracks in the palladium eIectrodes
must first be determined. 

The number of cracks in a palladium electrode cannot be counted after the Pons-Fleischmann type experiments. However, the strength reduction of palladium after
exposure to deuterium can be used to estimate the number of sites where cracks propagated in the bulk. Such
measurements were not reported in cold fusion experiments. The reduction of ultimate strength of palladium,
for hydrogen to palladium concentration of 0 to 1, was
measured in a NASA study.(6) For H/Pd ratio of 0.6, the
ultimate strength of 76 ksi (520 MN/m 2) was reduced to
44 ksi (300 MN/m2), a strength reduction of 220 MN/
m 2. For this reduction value, the critical crack length is
estimated at about 47 microns, the grain size level, which
controls the discontinuous crack propagation in embrittlement as mentioned earlier

The work-of-fracture can now be calculated using
the Griffith equation. For a critical crack length of 50
microns, a strength reduction of 220 MN/m 2, and a 200
stress concentration factor, the work-of-fracture is found
to be 1.24 MJ/m 2, which is much greater than the typical
surface energy of less than 1 J/m 2 for most metals and
alloys, including palladium. 

The enormous work done during the fracture process
is proposed to be the heat mechanism in cold fusion and
is, most likely, the primary energy term which was neglected in the study of the phenomenon. 

When two or more cracks nucleate within several
atomic radii, it is possible for these to coalesce into one
crack which, eventually, propagates along a grain
boundary or across the grain. The maximum number of
locations where cracks can nucleate and propagate across
1 cm 2 palladium interface is 2002, which corresponds to
50 microns separation. The number of locations is then
adjusted using the strength reduction ratio of 220/520,
and the heat liberated from cracks at all possible locations is found to be 2.1 MJ/cm a

Similar calculations for deuterium (30% greater effect than hydrogen) gives a work-of-fracture of 5.5 MJ/
cm a. Cracks can also propagate in the third orthogonal
direction within a palladium cube sample, in the process,
producing more heat. It follows that the heat liberated
in the Pons-Fleischmann experiments (4 MJ/cm 3) is only
a fraction of the maximum amount of heat that be released by the fracture process. 

Deuterium- or hydrogen-induced cracks can eventually break a metal sample in two, where the full ultimate strength across the fracture is lost. Using the ultimate
strength of palladium, the work of fracture 6.9 MJ/m a.
If cracks propagate at all possible locations and in all
three directions, then the maximum heat that can be liberated is 27.6 MJ/cm a or 5520 MJ/cm 3. This condition
is highly unlikely, but it demonstrates the tremendous
potential for heat generation by the fracture of metals.

The crack length of 50 microns is the major assumption made in the above analysis. This assumption
does not affect the final outcome much as long as crack
propagation occurs on the grain, and not the atomic distance and size level. It was noted in Ref. 1 that heat
production in cold fusion is "markedly dependent on
electrode volume." Of course, if the volume increases,
the fracture locations increase, and so will the heat.


5. EXPERIMENTAL VERIFICATION 

If only the surface energy (less than 1 J/m 2) is involved in the fracture of metals, then the heat produced
in the fracture of 1 cm 2 rod in tension will be small.
However, appreciable work is involved when the substantial fracture energy (more than 106 J/m 2) is considered, and detectable heat, to the touch, may be liberated.
Based on calculations in this paper, the author demonstrated that hot-to-the-touch condition occurs on the fracture surfaces of metals in simple tensile tests. Strain
energy is released and stored near crack tips, then suddenly discharged when the cracks propagate through the
bulk. The heat on the fracture surfaces is felt immediately after, and not before, break-up of the metal sample.
Of course, if a 1-cm sample can be pulled apart quickly
and in succession at 10- or 50-micron intervals, then
considerable heat will be generated: an accelerated cold
fusion experiment. 

Integrated tensile-calorimetric experiments under
controlled strain rates and other conditions will lead to
better understanding of the heat mechanism in cold fusion. 


6. TIME EFFECTS -- RAPID CORROSION 

Deuterium or hydrogen embrittlement of metals is
a corrosion process, and is time dependent. The general
behavior of embrittlemcnt in time is shown in Fig. 3.
The initial interval (A) shows no effect as the kinetics
of deuterium or hydrogen transport in the bulk predominate. This idle period is followed by an accelerated
strength reduction interval (B). During this period, many
sites are available for the fracture process. Eventually,
less and less sites are available for crack nucleation and
propagation and the fracture process and heat generation
stop. This behavior is similar to that reported in cold
fusion to date, where an initial idle period, for the absorption of deuterium into palladium, is followed by heat
generation and, finally, by a dormant stage when the
heat generation process stops. Fig. 3. Typical behavior of embrittlement with time showing delayed,
accelerated, and dormant fracture periods. Energy release is incremental (inset).

The power in the Pons-Fleischmann experiments
was estimated at more than "10 W cm -3 of the palladium electrode, ''(1) but for only 120 hours. Extrapolating
to 1000 or more hours at the same power rate is not valid
simply because the fracture work that can be done is
limited. Of course, considerable power can be generated
if the fracture energy is released in shorter periods. For
a given set of parameters, explosive crack propagation
is known to occur in metal structures, such as ships,
bridges, and aircraft. The suddenly fused and partially
vaporized palladium sample in the Pons-Fleischmann
experiments may be explained by the known short-time
release of fracture energy. The explosive crack propagation can be violent enough to produce traces of fusion
by-products. 

As mentioned earlier, deuterium-induced cracks
propagate discontinuously. Here, the fracture energy is
released incrementally (see inset in Fig. 3), which may
explain the heat pockets in the calorimetric cells, reported in the Pons-Fleischmann tests. As time goes on,
the conditions which cultivate the fracture process diminish, and the heat generation process comes to an end.
This is, perhaps, why in 5.5 years (nearly 50,000 hours),
only the 120 hours, or less, time-samples have been cited
by the original experimenters.


7. THE FUEL IS PALLADIUM, NOT DEUTERIUM

When all the locations susceptible to crack nucleation and propagation in the palladium (or other material)
are exhausted, the metal is, theoretically, burnt out. In
order for the cold fusion process to continue, the crystallographic structure, required to produce more cracks
and more heat, must be restored. The palladium electrodes must then be recycled (by melting) to continue
the heat generation process; and the efficiency estimates
must take this energy overhead into account. 

Professors Pons and Fleischmann projected figures
of merit of 1000%, and expect one million percent thermal yield, from their process. This is based on the "joule
heat or total energy supplied to the cell "O) and the amount
of heat liberated in the cells. As described above, the
small energy supplied to the cell is not the only, or even
primary, input involved. The efficiency of cold fusion must take into account the considerable energy required
to process the metal electrodes from the ore, or to recycle
the cracked palladium electrodes by melting. 

From the analysis in this paper and other relevant
considerations, we may conclude that palladium, and not
deuterium, is the fuel; just as coal, and not air (oxygen),
is the fuel in that combustion. And just as combustion
ceases when coal is turned to ashes, so the heat generation in cold fusion ceases when palladium is all burnt,
or cracked. The abundance of air, in the case of carbon
ashes, or deuterium, in the case of the cracked palladium, will not continue, or restart, the burning process.
There is a net entropy increase in both processes. 

Coal burning is irreversible as heat cannot be made to
flow back into the ashes to reproduce coal. The exhausted structure of palladium can be restored after embrittlement and heat generation, but only by melting.
The ability to recycle the exhausted metals makes the
heat generation by cold fusion a reversible process. In
accordance with the second law of thermodynamics, the
net entropy change in cold fusion (between the electrolytic cell and the furnace) must be zero. It then appears
that the cold fusion process may not be a viable source
of energy. Recognizing that palladium, and not deuterium, is the fuel in the Pons-Fleischmann system will lead
to better study and applications of the phenomenon. 


8. CONCLUSION 

The heat mechanism in the Pons-Fleischmann experiments was identified as the fracture work of cracks
induced in palladium by deuterium. The work-of-fracture was calculated and shown to correspond to the excess heat measured in the cold fusion experiments. The
maximum heat that can be liberated from the process
was shown to be considerable, but finite. Only a fraction
of break even, and not 1000% or more, has been achieved
from cold fusion to date. Other characteristics of the
process were also presented, such as the identification
of palladium, and not deuterium, as the fuel in the process. 

When conducting cold fusion experiments, using
palladium, titanium, nickel, or other metals and alloys,
it will be useful to measure the strength of the electrodes
before and after exposure to deuterium. The strength
reduction can be used to estimate the energy absorbed
by local deformation in the fractured surfaces so that
experimental-theoretical correlation can be established.
It is also important to carefully identify the processing
technique of the electrode material to establish the likelihood of embrittlement and fracture energy conversion
to heat. Detailed metallographic analysis of the palladium samples will yield useful information. The phenomenon, now popularly known as cold fusion, will find
uses for heat storage in special applications, but the process
must first be controlled. A similar process, the piezoelectric effect, converts mechanical energy to electrical
energy, but only in asymmetrical crystals. Unlike piezoelectric devices, metal-burning devices will store energy in the bulk of a greater variety of metals and alloys
for use when needed. 

Numerous chemical, physical, and mechanical
processes in the palladium-deuterium system affect the
results, but not the order of magnitude, of this study. 


REFERENCES

1. M. Fleischmann and S. Pons, (1989). Electrochemically-induced
nuclear fusion of deuterium. J. Electroanaly. Chem. 261, 301.
2. G. E. Dieter, Jr., (1961), Mechanical Metallurgy (Chaps. 7, 14)
(McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York).
3. H. G. Nelson, (1972). The Kinetic and Mechanical Aspects of
Hydrogen-Induced Failure in Metals (NASA TN D-6691, Washington, D.C.).
4. V. A. Maricheve, (1988). Anomalous Isotope Effects During Hydrogen Embrittlement of Structural Materials in Electrolytes. 10th
ICMC, p. 2321.
5. J. E. Gordon, (1984). The New Science of Strong Materials (Chap.
5) (Princeton University Press, New Jersey).
6. R. J. Smith and D. A. Otterson, (1969). Some Tensile and Electrical Resistance Properties of Palladium-Hydrogen and TitaniumHydrogen Systems, NASA SP-227. Proceedings of Aerospace
Structural Materials, Cleveland, Ohio, November, pp. 269-278.
7. A. F. AbuTaha, (1989). Cold Fusion. Engineering Perspectives,
Poster Paper to the Cold Fusion Phenomena Workshop, Santa Fe,
May.
8. A. F. AbuTaha, Cold Fusion. The Energy Mechanism (unpublished work).
9. P. Haansen, (1986). Physical Metallurgy (Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge).
10. A. Zangwill, (1988). Physics at Surfaces (Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge).
11. L. Pauling, (1988). General Chemistry (Dover Publications, New
York).
12. F. Seitz (1987). The Modern Theory of Solids (Dover Publications, New York). 


