1. Introduction

Nuclear physicists have studied deuteron-deuteron fusion over the years using energetic
deuteron beams incident on different targets that contain deuterium. Local conservation of
energy and momentum dictates that in an exothermic reaction, the reaction energy is expressed
in the kinetic energy of the reaction products. As a result, we know what the primary reaction
channels (p+t and n+3He) are, since the reaction products can be observed directly. The particle
energies and angular distributions are also available directly from experiment. A theoretical
model for the deuteron-deuteron reaction follows directly from solving the Schrodinger equation
(approximately) for the relevant four-body problem, with two deuterons in the input channel, and
with p+t and n+3He in the exit channels. The results from such models are in good agreement
with experiment.

Because the associated theoretical problem is so simple, at least conceptually, one would not
imagine that there could be anything that could compete with the primary reaction mechanism,
or change fundamentally what happens when two deuterons interact. The excess heat effect in
the Fleischmann-Pons experiment seems not to follow this clear and simple picture. As such, if
the experiments are right, then they suggest that something else can happen. In the decades
following the announcement of the excess heat effect, there have been a great many positive
experiments which seem to confirm the existence of the effect. Hence, we are faced with the
theoretical problem of figuring out how the effect works.

We might turn to nuclear physics and solid-state physics, both mature disciplines, in order to
develop a theoretical model. Unfortunately, over the years no one has had much luck convincing
their colleagues that a suitable explanation can be obtained from such a starting place. Moreover,
such a model if developed would not be accepted without very strong experimental support. In
the end, one must understand theory through an experimental foundation. We only know what
happens because we can observe it in an experiment.

This presents a serious issue when we address the Fleischmann-Pons experiment. The basic
effect is nuclear, yet due to the absence of commensurate energetic nuclear particles, we are not
able to study the primary reaction mechanism directly as we can in the case of deuteron-deuteron
fusion. This provides us with the motivation to re-examine the experiments in order to
understand better what we can learn about theory.


2. Excess heat effect

The excess heat effect is observed as a temperature increase in heavy water electrochemical
experiments where palladium cathodes are loaded with deuterium. The increase in temperature
appears to be due to power generation in the palladium cathode. Perhaps the most important
question regarding the excess heat effect itself is whether or not it is real.

The first report of excess power in association with PdD electrochemical experiments was by
Fleischmann, Pons and Hawkins [1]. Unfortunately, this work was not well written, and the
discussion provided was insufficient to allow for replication in general; this resulted in a large
number of subsequent negative results early on (see [2] as an example). Confirming experiments
were reported subsequently by Fleischmann and Pons [3]; by the SRI effort [4]; by Storms [5];
and by many other groups around the world. By now, there have been reported more than 100
observations of excess heat in Fleischmann-Pons experiments.

2.1. Energy:
Much discussion has been devoted to the issue of excess energy in the experiments. In the
basic Fleischmann-Pons experiment the Pd cathode must be charged for a month or so prior to
the observation of excess power events. As a result, it has been argued that the energy produced
in the bursts is small compared to the input energy, so that there may be no net energy
production, but only the release of stored power not accounted for during charging.

We note that in the experiment reported in [3] the excess power integrated over a roughly 100
hour burst event was comparable to the total input energy, so that the total output energy was
roughly twice the input energy. A hypothetical storage mechanism for this experiment would
need to accommodate 4 MJ in 0.157 cc of cathode; which can be compared to the 1.2 kJ energy
release which would be produced by the detonation of an equivalent volume of the explosive
TNT. This argues strongly against any conventional storage mechanism.

Other experiments have been reported with higher energy gains. Swartz has claimed
reproducible energy gains over 250% using the method described in [6]. The Energetics team
reported in 2003 an observed energy gain of 6.7 in a glow discharge experiment [7], and in 2004
an observed energy gain of 25 in an electrochemical PdD experiment [8]. The conclusion from
these experiments and others is that net energy is produced, and that the energy storage argument
is inconsistent with experiment.

2.2. Power density:
To determine the associated power density, we require information about what part of the
cathode is active. One relevant observation (to be discussed below) concerns the emission of 4He
(as ash) into the gas stream, which could only occur if the helium were created within about a
micron from the surface. In the Szpak experiment, Pd is co-deposited on a copper substrate, and
excess heat is observed [9]. The observed power per unit area is on the order of 80 mW/cm2, and
the corresponding power per unit Pd volume is in the range of 160-800 W/cm3 for an active Pd
thickness estimated to be in the range of 5 m to 1 m. In some experiments significantly higher
numbers can be estimated. For the experiment described in [8], the power per unit area reaches
about 4 W/cm2, which corresponds to about 8 kW/cm3 if we assume a 5 micron active thickness.
There is evidence for hot spots [10] and localized surface melting in some experiments [11].

2.2. Loading, current density and flux:
There appear to be two different requirements on deuterium loading. In the SRI experiments,
the cathodes need to achieve a loading of about 0.95 (deuterium atoms per palladium atom) for
excess heat to be observed at all [12]. A cathode which has achieved this during the roughly
month-long charging period then later on needs to be loaded above a threshold near 0.85 to
produce an excess heat burst. In many experiments [13-15] there has been observed a linear
dependence of the excess power on current density above a threshold as first described by
Fleischmann and Pons [16].

Excess power in Fleischmann-Pons experiments is dependent on the deuterium flux in the
cathode. Although this is implicit in the ideas presented by Fleischmann on the Coehn effect in
ICCF4 [17], it was first noticed in connection with a Fleischmann-Pons experiment at SRI,
where the excess heat seemed to increase when a cathode spontaneously went into a breathing
mode. This led to an empirical relation [18] for the excess power Pxs
where I is the current and x is the loading. Subsequently, experiments reported by Li and
coworkers have taken advantage of deuterium flux [19], and also by Arata and Zhang [20].

2.3. Temperature:
Fleischmann and Pons noticed that the excess heat increased following the application of a
resistive calibration pulse to their cell, which suggested that they could take advantage of the
effect to achieve higher power operation [21]. Somewhat later, Storms observed a dependence of
excess power on temperature of the form
where E was reported as 15 Kcal/mole, or 670 meV [22].

This dependence is not seen in all experiments. It has been suggested that since the observed
E is close to that for helium diffusion in Pd, that this temperature dependence may be
associated with helium accumulation in active sites in experiments with high local excess power
per unit volume.


3. Helium

In association with the press conference in March 1989, Fleischmann and Pons apparently
claimed that helium had been observed in association with the excess heat effect. Subsequent
measurements did not provide a confirmation, and the issue of helium production subsequently
has been contentious.

3.1. Detection in the gas phase:
A significant step forward was made with the observation of 4He in the gas phase by Miles and
Bush [23]. Prior to this, a great deal of effort had been focused on searches for elemental and
isotopic anomalies in the Pd cathodes, as well as for trapped helium, with few positive results.
Since the excess heat effect has no accompanying energetic particles, one could not learn much
about reaction mechanisms or possible products, and all elements and isotopes were potential
suspects. Helium as a reaction product had been considered previously, but was expected to be
trapped in the metal if it was produced. That it might be observed in the gas was unexpected.

Subsequent work has largely confirmed the presence of 4He in the gas outside of the cathode in
Fleischmann-Pons experiments [24]. At ICCF6, Gozzi presented some striking results that
appeared to show that heat bursts were time-correlated with 4He bursts in the gas phase [25].

3.1. Mass difference, helium in the gas, and retention:
Helium as a product has been of interest since the Fleischmann-Pons experiment requires
deuterium, and two deuterons contain two protons and neutrons which is the same as 4He. The
mass difference is
E[dd] – E[4He] = 23.86 MeV

If the excess energy was produced through a physical process in which deuterons interacted
somehow to make 4He, then one should be able to tell from a comparison of the energy produced
per 4He atom detected. In Gozzi’s experiments, the ratio of 4He atom detected seemed to vary
from burst to burst in the range of 10% to 100% of that expected from the mass difference. A
possible explanation for the results observed was that the helium was produced initially near the
cathode surface, so that it could get out; but different amounts would be released during
particular events. The missing helium was assumed to remain inside the outer surface of the
cathode.

3.2. Energy per 4He:
In an experiment carried out at SRI, excess heat was observed in a calorimeter that was helium
leak tight, and 4He was measured. The amount of helium measured was 62% of that expected
based on the 23.86 MeV mass difference. Subsequently an effort was made to recover the helium
remaining in the cathode; this was done through cycling deuterium in and out of the cathode.
More helium was captured, and in the end the ratio of energy to 4He was observed to be 104% of
the 23.86 MeV mass difference with 10% error [12]. This result is supported by the
measurements reported in [26]. In two of the experiments reported, the amount of 4He detected
was low (about 51% and 69%, taking into account the background) of the amount expected
based on the mass difference. However, in another experiment (Laser-3) an attempt was made to
recover the helium remaining in the cathode [27], and the result was that the amount of helium
observed was slightly over 100% of the expected amount. Hence, the two experiments reported
to date in which helium recovery was attempted both give results in agreement with the mass
difference within experimental error.


4. Laser stimulation

Letts and Cravens [28] found that an excess heat could be triggered in a Pd cathode near
threshold with a laser beam at low intensity. In these experiments, an incident diode laser beam
of 30 mW was shown to lead to excess power levels in the range of 200-800 mW. Polarization
dependence was observed, which was later studied by the ENEA group [26]. It was found that p-
polarized light (with electric field partly normal to the surface) could stimulate excess heat, but s-
polarization (with electric field aligned with the surface) was ineffective. This is consistent with
coupling to compressional plasmon modes. In the Letts and Cravens experiment, a thin gold
coating is deposited on the surface, with a surface plasmon resonance expected near the
frequency of the incident light.

At this conference, Letts presented results for dual laser stimulation where the excess heat was
found to respond to the beat frequency [29]. Strong responses were found at three difference
frequencies (8.3 THz, 15.3 THz, and 20.4 THz), the first two of which can be associated with the
k=0, or zero group velocity, optical phonon frequencies of PdD (the 20.4 THz frequency
matches the upper k=0 frequency in PdH, but as yet there is no experimental evidence to support
this). Once again, the dual laser beating effect is sensitive to laser polarization, and requires both
laser beams to be oriented with p-polarization.


5. Connection with low-level nuclear emission

There has been much discussion over the years as to whether the low-level nuclear emissions
which have been reported are related to the excess heat effect. Attempts to detect nuclear
signatures at the time of an excess heat event have yielded no commensurate signals, and
generally no low-level signals [30].

In Fleischmann-Pons experiments, excess heat is reported at relatively high current density
(200-1000 mA/cm2), while neutron emission tends to be seen at much lower current density (10-
30 mA/cm2). In [31] results from experiments that were run using Takahashi’s high-low current
protocol showed that cathodes which produced excess heat (and no neutron emission) at high
current density, also showed low-level neutron emission (and no excess heat) at low current
density. Such observations indicate a connection, in this case an anticorrelation.

5.1. Low-level deuteron-deuteron fusion:
Evidence for low-level neutron and proton emission consistent with deuteron-deuteron fusion
has been put forth over the years. Jones first reported the effect in TiD in 1989, and subsequent
measurements after 1989 have provided confirmation (some of this work is reviewed in [12]),
and evidence that deuteron-deuteron fusion reaction products are seen in Fleischmann-Pons
experiments in PdD at low current density.

5.2. Other energetic emissions:
Cecil and coworkers have claimed the observation of low-level energetic particles from TiD up
to and beyond 10 MeV [33,34], as well as protons consistent with deuteron-deuteron fusion.
Lipson and coworkers have reported repeated observations of low-level nuclear emissions from
PdD included protons near 3 MeV (consistent with deuteron-deuteron fusion), as well as alpha
particles between 10 and 20 MeV [35,36].

5.3. Karabut’s x-rays:
Karabut has reported the collimated emission of x-rays between 1-1.5 keV from Ti and Pd
cathodes in glow discharge experiments run in deuterium, as well as in other gases [37,38]. The
x-ray energy from energy-integrated absorption appears to be correlated with the cathode metal,
and discharge voltage. Ti and Pd do not have fluorescence lines in the range. These observations
raise the possibility that the emission is of nuclear origin, and that the collimation arises from
local phase coherence among the emitters (the collimation is observed to be normal from the
cathode surface). It seems implausible that phase coherence could be established in the case of
electronic transitions.


6. Relevant beam experiments

There are at least two different kinds of beam experiments that have been done with metal
deuterides that are of note in this discussion. One of these addresses the question of screening,
and the other concerns localization.

6.1. Screening:
There was much discussion about the impact of screening between deuterons in metal
deuterides back in 1989, with the general consensus that significant screening effects would not
be expected in PdD. However, low-energy deuterium beam experiments over the past decade has
shown strong screening effects for deuteron-deuteron fusion reactions in metals in general, and
particularly strong screening in PdD in particular [39,40].

6.2. Kasagi effect:
In the mid-1990s, Kasagi and coworkers described beam experiments (in TiD and in PdD)
where broad energetic proton and alpha signals were observed. Normally, deuteron-deuteron
fusion produces two-body products, such as p+t and n+3He. In this case, the reaction energy is
sharp, with the reaction energy apportioned inversely to the mass. In a secondary reaction such
as t(d,)n, there is a spread in the alpha energy due to the initial 800 keV energy of the triton.
However, in the experiments described in [41], a much broader alpha and proton signal was seen.
Such a broad signal could only come about from a three-body exit channel, which in this case
was attributed to n+p+. The particles and end-point energies in this case are consistent with a
three-body reaction d+d+d → n+p+, which would require two of the deuterons initially within
the same to be localized on the 10 fm scale.


7. Discussion

Based on the discussion above, which is incomplete both in scope and in citations to the
relevant literature (by necessity given the limitations of a proceedings paper), we can begin to
discuss what experiment provides as input to theory. Perhaps the most significant feature is that
experiment seems to support the notion of a new kind of nuclear reaction in which the reaction
energy is not expressed through the kinetic energy of the products. This statement is very
significant, in that as commented on above, local conservation of energy and momentum require
that energetic particles result from an exothermic reaction. No such process has been observed
previously in nuclear physics. We note that among those working on excess heat in the
Fleischmann-Pons experiment, that many are convinced even now that commensurate energetic
particles are produced, only to have escaped detection so far. Future experiments that address
upper limits on the energy of possible reaction products would be helpful in this discussion.

As to what it is that reacts, there is no general consensus at this time. However, deuterium
seems implicated (since for the most part no excess heat is reported with Fleischmann-Pons
experiments using Pd cathodes and light water), and the correlation of 4He with the energy
produced implicates it as the ash. The two experiments in which an effort was made to account
for retained 4He give results consistent with 24 MeV per 4He, consistent with the mass difference
between two deuterons and 4He. However, there is agreement among a subset of workers that the
mechanism involved converted deuterons to 4He, while others contest this. Badly needed are new
experiments which address the correlation of 4He with energy, taking care to collect all helium
produced. Also needed are experiments which address how close to the surface the retained
helium is, which should help shed light on where the reactions occur.

If the reaction energy is not expressed kinetically, then it is a reasonable question as to where it
does go. In the end, the energy produced shows up as heat. There are no direct measurements of
the energy produced in condensed matter modes prior to thermalization. The dual laser
experiment may be relevant to this question, since the excess heat responds to the beat
frequency, suggesting a nonlinear response, under conditions where the laser intensity is orders
of magnitude too weak for any nonlinear response to be expected by conventional means. If the
reaction energy were deposited into plasmon modes [keeping in mind that one would expect
hybridization of low energy (2 eV) plasmon modes with optical phonon modes], then these
internal modes may have sufficient excitation to provide a nonlinear response. Hence, there is an
indirect argument for where the energy goes at least in one kind of experiment. The very high
local power per unit volume production may be connected with the dual laser nonlinearity. What
is really needed is some new experiment which can detect enhanced excitation in longitudinal
plasmon modes and in optical phonon modes in association with excess heat production.

Attention should be drawn to the three-body Kasagi experiment, which suggests the possibility
of deuteron-deuteron localization on the fermi scale. If correct, this experiment is of great
significance, and may provide a glimpse into part of the internal reaction dynamics. Deuteron-
deuteron fusion anticorrelated with excess heat production is supportive of mechanisms
involving deuterium, but this is not universally agreed on at present. The strong screening effects
observed in beam experiments are thought by many to be related to the low-level fusion effect;
however, neutron production seems to come in (hour long) bursts events, similar to excess heat
bursts. Most likely, there is more involved in low-level deuteron-deuteron fusion than simple
screening effects.

Attention should also be drawn to the energetic alpha signal. The key question here should be:
where does the energy come from? There are no energetic particles with even greater energy
present in the amounts needed for the disintegration of nuclei with alpha particles in the 10-20
MeV range. So, the energy must come from somewhere else. But from where? The significance
of the observation is in the implication that a large quantum may be communicated somehow by
the local condensed matter environment leading to the disintegration of a nucleus. This would be
unprecedented in nuclear physics, but seems to be a direct consequence of the Cecil and Lipson
experiments. If such a large quantum can be so communicated, then the possibility of it
somehow being chopped up into a large number of small quanta seems perhaps more plausible.

The requirements on loading probably tell us something about the local environment needed
for the reactions to occur. Arguments put forth over the years include: increased density results
in increased conventional reaction probability; a connection with the D to Pd loading at which
PdD becomes thermodynamically unstable; the development of a new phase; and a connection
with the D to Pd loading at which host Pd vacancies are stabilized. Calculations indicate that D2
cannot form inside bulk PdD due to occupation of antibonding orbitals, but perhaps the situation
is different near vacancies where the electron density is lower. NMR experiments may be able to
clarify this in the case of thin film samples of PdD with high vacancy concentration. There is no
agreement on these issues at this time, and experiments have not yet clarified the role of loading.


References

1. M. Fleischmann, S. Pons, and M. Hawkins, Journal of Electroanalytical Chemistry 261 301-
308 (1989).
2. N. S. Lewis, C. A. Barnes, M. J. Heben, A. Kumar, S. R. Lunt, G. E. McManis, G. M.
Miskelly, R. M. Penner, M. J. Sailor, P. G. Santangelo, G. A. Shreve, B. J. Tufts, M. J.
Youngquist, R. W. Kavanagh, S. E. Kellogg, R. B. Vogelaar, T. R. Wang, R. Kondrat, and R.
New, Nature 340 525 (1989).
3. M. Fleischmann, S. Pons, M.W. Anderson, L.J. Li and M. Hawkins, J. Electroanal. Chem.
287 293 (1990).
4. M. C. H. McKubre, S. Crouch-Baker, R. C. Rocha-Filho, S. I. Smedley, F. L. Tanzella, T.
Passell, and J. Santucci, J. Electroanal. Chem. 368 55 (1994).
5. E. Storms, Fusion Technology 23 230 (1993).
6. M. R. Swartz and G. M. Verner, Proc. ICCF10 29 (2003).
7. I. Dardik, H. Branover, A. El-Boher, D. Gazit, E. Golbreich, E. Greenspan, A. Kapusta, B.
Khatchatorov, V. Krakov, S. Lesin, B. Michailovitch, G. Shani, and T. Zilov Proc. ICCF10 p.
61 (2003).
8. I. Dardik, T. Zilov, H. Branover, A. El-Boher, E. Greenspan, B. Khatchaturov, V. Krakov, S.
Lesin and M. Tsirlin, Proc. ICCF11 p. 84 (2004).
9. S. Szpak, P. A. Mosier-Boss, M. H. Miles, and M. Fleischmann, Thermochimica Acta 410
101 (2004).
10. S. Szpak, P. A. Mosier-Boss, J. Dea, and F. Gordon, Proc. ICCF10 p. 13 (2003).
11. J. Dash, G. Noble, and D. Diman, Proc. ICCF4, p. 25-1 (1994).
12. P. L. Hagelstein, M. C. H. McKubre, D. J. Nagel, T. A. Chubb, R. J. Hekman, Proc. ICCF11
p. 23 (2004).
13. M. C. H. McKubre, S. Crouch-Baker, A. M. Riley, S. I. Smedley, and F. L. Tanzella, Proc.
ICCF3 p. 5 (1992).
14. E. Storms, Proc. ICCF6 p. 105 (1996).
15. K. Kunimatsu, N. Hasegawa, A. Kubota, N. Imai, M. Ishakawa, H. Akita, and Y. Tsuchida,
Proc. ICCF3 p. 31 (1992).
16. M. Fleischmann and S. Pons, Proc. ICCF1 p. 1 (1990).
17. C. Bartolomeo, M. Fleischmann, G. Larramona, S. Pons, J. Roulette, H. Sugiura, and G.
Preparata, Proc. ICCF4 p. 19-1 (1994).
18. M. C. H. McKubre, S. Crouch-Baker, A. K. Hauser, S. I. Smedley, F. L. Tanzella, M. S.
Williams, and S. S. Wing, Proc. ICCF5 p. 17 (1995).
19. X. Z. Li, B. Liu, J. Tian, Q. M. Wei, R. Zhou, Z. W. Yu, J. Phys. D 36 3095 (2003).
20. Y. Arata and Y.-C. Zhang, Proc. ICCF12 p. 44 (2005).
21. S. Pons and M. Fleischmann, Proc. ICCF2 p. 349 (1991).
22. E. Storms, Proc. ICCF4 vol. 2 p. 4-1 (1993).
23. M. H. Miles and B. Bush, Proc. ICCF3 p. 189 (1992).
24. M. H. Miles, Proc. ICCF10 p. 123 (2003)
25. F. Cellucci, P. L. Cignini, G. Gigli, D. Gozzi, M. Tomellini, E. Cisbani, S. Frullani, F.
Garibaldi, M. Jodice, and G. M. Urciuoli, Proc. ICCF6 p. 3 (1996).
26. M. Appicella, E. Castagna, L. Capobianco, L. D’Aulerio, G. Mazzitelli, F. Sarto, A. Rosada,
E. Santoro, V. Violante, M. McKubre, F. Tanzella, and C. Sibilia, Proc. ICCF12 p. 117
27. V. Violante, private communication.
28. D. Letts and D. Cravens, Proc. ICCF10 p. 159 (2003).
29. D. Letts and P. L. Hagelstein, Proc. ICCF14 (2008).
30. S. Isagawa, Y. Kanda, and T. Suzuki, Proc. ICCF5 p. 124 (1995).
31. H. Ogawa, S. Yoshida, Y. Yoshinaga, M. Aida, and M. Okamoto, Proc. ICCF5, p. 116
32. P. Mosier-Boss, S. Szpak, F. E. Gordon, and L. P. G. Forsley, submitted for publication.
33. F. E. Cecil, H. Liu, D. Beddingfield, and C. S. Galovich, Anomalous Effects in
Deuterium/Solid Systems, AIP Conference Proceedings 228 p. 375 (1990).
34. H. Liu, Studies of nuclear reactions D-D, D-6Li, and D-10B at low energies and charged
particle emission from deuterium-metal systems, PhD Thesis, Colorado School of Mines,
35. A. G. Lipson, A.S. Roussetski, G.H. Miley, and E.I. Saunin, Proc. ICCF8 p. 231(2000); A. G.
Lipson, A.S. Roussetski, G.H. Miley, and C. H. Castano, Proc. ICCF9 p. 218 (2002).
36. A. G. Lipson, A.S. Roussetski, G.H. Miley, and E.I. Saunin, Proc. ICCF10 p. 539 (2003).
37. A. B. Karabut and S. A. Kolomeychenko, Proc. ICCF10 p. 585 (2003).
38. A. G. Lipson, A. S. Rusetskii, A. B. Karabut, and G. Miley, Journal of Experimental and
Theoretical Physics 100 1175 (2005)
39. F. Raiola, L. Gang, C. Bonomo, G. Gyurky, M. Aliotta, H. W. Becker, R. Bonetti, C.
Broggini, P. Corvisiero, A. D'Onofrio, Z. Fulop, G. Gervino, L. Gianella, M. Junker, P. Prati,
V. Roca, C. Rolfs, M. Romano, E. Somorjai, F. Streider, F. Terrasi, G. Fiorentini, K.
Langanke, and J. Winter, Eur. Phys. J. A 19 283 (2004).
40. F. Raiola, B. Buchard, Z. Fulop, G. Gyurky, S. Zeng, J. Cruz, A. Di Leva, B. Limata, M.
Fonseca, H. Luis, M. Aliotta, H. W. Becker, C. Broggini, A. D'Onofrio, L. Gianlanella, G.
Imbriani, A. P. Jesus, M. Junker, J. P. Ribereiro, V. Roca, C. Rolfs, M. Romano, E. Somorjai,
F. Streider, and F. Terrasi, J. Phys. G: Nucl. Phys. 31 1141 (2005).
41. J. Kasagi, T. Ohtsuki, K. Ishu and M. Hiraga, Phys. Soc. Japan 64, 777 (1995).
