Abstract:

It is shown that the same phenomenon has been
observed in Cold Fusion and also in another rather
different experiments. The necessity to take into
account the electron participation in nuclear fusion
proce:ss in dense media is ensuing from this result. It
implies that the fusion reiaction rate, necessary for
obtaining the Lawson critE􀂨rion in the thermonuclear
case, is not any valid in those experiments: so a new
form􀂩la is proposed.


1.Introduction: Correlation between experiments

Nuclear fusion reaction counting data from diverse
tentative fusion experiments have been plotted in
function of deuteron energy E in logarithmic scale
(Figure 1) . Those experiments were of three kinds: the
o2 o cluster collision experiments, the transitory flow
of current pattern in deuterated media, and the so
called cold fusion experiments [1]. It turned out that
those, experiments were non-thermonuclear origin and that
the mean square method applied to the experiment
reprssentative points, could lead to a fit with a
straight line whose slope was bounded between 1.5 and 2 .

This correlation suggested that there could be a
cormnon cause of the fusion reaction production in very
diffe:rent experiments

The hypothesis which was been made consisted of
taking into account the role of all plasma constituents,
particularly the electrons, whereas the thermonuclear
hy-p<::>thes.is takes only .t nto .account the ion existence.


2. Double screening process.

There between two colliding deuterons. Firstly the
cloud of moving electrons, with their great mobility,
from the nearby environment towards the positive
potential accident created by the two colliding
deuterons. Secondly a change of reference potential Vp
at the colliding place due to the environmental electron
depopulation. The whole phenomenon can be called "Double
Screening", inspi te the first effect is less important
than the second one. This reasoning leads to an
effective expression in function of radius r, outside
the nuclear well, which has the form,This potential is closei to the one proposed
phenomenologically by many authors

For calculating the barrier transmission factor F,
the non relativistic Schrodinger equation is useful. One
can drop the L-term, as the wavelength of partial
amplitudes is large

One has to take into account the real useful
parameters in this process: the nuclear reaction rate R,
the nuclear cross section cr, the whole barrier crossing
duration 0, the barrier width L, the transmission
barrier factor F, the number n of particles which can be
involved in c'. nuclear reaction. Using an improved
dimensional analysis method [2j, one gets the following
formula:

It replaces the customary expression, valid only in the
thermonuclear hypothesis and which imply the Lawson
criterion:


3. Results ot: calculations.

The results of the barrier transmission factor
calculations, give a straight line in the log R diagramm
vs log E, for a constant number of electrons
contributing to the Double Screening (Figure 1). The
slope of those straight lines is close to the slope of
the straight regression line, deduced from the
experimental points. The most probable number of those
electrons is in the range of 10 3 to 2 103 .

Moreover this number is in agreement with simple
ion distribution considerations in dense media, this
point of view consisting of assuming that the 3D spatial
deuteron distribution obeys Poisson's law [ 2].

The results of those calculations are also in
agreement with several experimental results, the most
striking being the Brookhaven results of o2o colliding
clusters [3]. The number of nuclear fusion reactions has
a maximum in function of the o2o molecule number in the
cluster (Figure 2). For a o2 o number inferior to the one
of naximum there is one unique deuteron collision
center. The maximum corresponds to the turning up of two
deuteron collision points Those two collision centers
are competitor for attracting the environmental
electrons.

A n2 o collision experiment performed with a greater
number of o2o molecules in the cluster would probably
give another maximum counting rate followed by a
decreiase, corresponding to the turning up of three
deuteron collision centers.


4. Ccnclusions

Electrons play a fundamental role in a nuclear
process. An experiment performed by M. Fallavier et Al [4]
, with pure deuteron clusters has not given any fusion
reaction. According the double screening model, clusters
must be rich in electrons for sustaining fusion
reactions. It builds up the conjecture which consist to
suppose, as made J.Schwinger [5], that the D(D,4He)gamma
reaction becomes probable. So it could account for the
mysterious excess heat production, given that 4He nuclei
have a very short range in dense media, and can so
produce gammas and heat.

