1. Theory—Resonance Selects Damping

Selective resonant tunneling theory predicts that there should be a state of long life-time with two deuterons inside
the metal crystal lattice when deuterium gas is absorbed by a metal. This has been verified in Japan, and we further
guess that this long life-time state would emit neutrino which is detectable within the sensitivity of KamLAND neutrino
detector.

It is well known that hydrogen molecule will be dissociated into hydrogen atoms when hydrogen is absorbed by
metal. The hydrogen atoms will be further ionized into protons and electrons in the crystal of metal. In general, those
protons are trapped and separated by the lattice potential. The distance between them is similar to or even greater than
the distance in a hydrogen molecule. The opportunity for them to approach each other is exponentially small due to
the Coulomb barrier between two positively charged protons. The same is true for a pair of deuterons inside the metal
crystal lattice. The probability for a pair of deuterons to approach each other is exponentially small as well. However,
once a pair of deuterons stays together, it will form an excited state of the helium nucleus. This excited state of the
helium nucleus will decay through strong nuclear interaction or electromagnetic interaction. However, according to
the selective resonant tunneling theory [1,2], another kind of excited state of the helium nucleus will be generated. It
is a product of the resonant tunneling through a thick and high Coulomb barrier inside the metal crystal lattice. The
resonant tunneling will select only the state with long life-time because the resonant tunneling would not be valid if the
life-time of that state is not long enough. Hence, this state must decay through some weak interaction instead of any
strong nuclear interaction or electromagnetic interaction. The most important test of this selective resonant tunneling
theory is to search for this long life-time resonant state of two deuterons.


2. Experiment—Evidences for Long Life-time State

Three deuterons might interact if two deuterons stay together with a long life-time in a target while the third deuteron
is impinging on this target. The longer this life-time is, the greater the opportunity to see this 3-deuteron reaction.
Professor Kasagi of Tohoku University observed this 3-D fusion reaction early in 1993 in Nuclear Science Laboratory

About 150 keV deuteron beam bombarded on a titanium target, which had absorbed a lot of deuterium gas in advance
to form TiDx with x > 1.2. Usually, we expect only the 2-body fusion reactions, because the probability of 3-body
fusion reactions is almost zero. However, Kasagi observed the 3-body fusion reactions with much more probability.
Every 105 2-body fusion reactions he observed one 3-body fusion reaction. In comparison, the theoretically expected
value was only one 3-body fusion reaction in every 1031 2-body fusion reactions.

In 1995–1997, Professor Takahashi of Osaka University conﬁrmed this discovery in terms of another reaction
channel [4]. Kasagi studied the reaction channel: d + d + d → p + n + 4He (Q = 21.62 MeV), and Takahashi studied
the reaction channel: d + d + d → t + 3He (Q = 9.5 MeV). Kasagi found that the maximum energy of the proton and
4He were 17 and 6.5 MeV, respectively. These could not be explained if only 2-body fusion reactions were involved.
3-body fusion reaction of d + d + d → p + n + 4He (Q = 21.62 MeV) explained not only the maximum energy of
the proton and 4He, but also the shape of the continuous energy spectrum of the protons and 4He. Takahashi conﬁrmed
3-body fusion reaction: d + d + d → t + 3He in terms of the energy of triton and 3He (4.75 MeV), and their equal
yields. Both Kasagi and Takahashi obtained the similar ratio of the 3-body reaction rate to 2-body reaction rate:∼ 10−5.
Takahashi further estimated the life-time of the state of two deuterons based on this ratio of reaction rates. The life-time
of the 2-deuteron resonance state was estimated to be 104 −105 s, which was just in the range predicted by the selective
resonant tunneling model.


3. Neutrino Emission—Feasibility of Detection

Such a long life-time state can only decay through some weak interaction, because the strong nuclear interaction
or electromagnetic interaction is too strong to have such a long life-time. The weak interaction is supposed to be
accompanied by neutrino emission although we do not know exactly which kind of weak interactions are involved. Is
it feasible to detect such a weak neutrino emission using KamLAND neutrino detector?
The recent visit to Research Center for Neutrino Science at Tohoku University gave us the impetus to consider this
feasibility with four favorable factors:

(1) Sensitivity. KamLAND detector requires that on its spherical surface the neutrino ﬂux should be of the order
of 106/s/cm2. The diameter of this spherical surface is of 13 m. Hence, it requires that at the center of this
spherical scintillation liquid there is a neutrino source which has the intensity of 6 × 1012/s. It corresponds to
an “excess heat” power of Watts. Nevertheless, it is possible to have such amount of “excess heat” power in
the metal hydride frequently [5,6] if the “excess heat” is from the recoil energy due to the neutrino emission.
(2) Energy. KamLAND detector has successfully detected the solar neutrino, the ﬁssion reactor neutrino, and the
geo-neutrino; hence, it is easier for KamLAND detector to obtain the better ratio of signal to noise if the energy
of the unknown neutrino source is greater then 5 MeV. Indeed the preliminary estimate of the energy from the
metal hydride is just above 5 MeV (see Section 4 ).
(3) Puriﬁcation of scintillation liquid. KamLAND detector is composed of a high-purity scintillation liquid. Its
impurity is at the level of 10−5. It is scheduled to further purify the scintillation liquid this year. Its impurity level
would be further reduced to 10−7. Hence, the ratio of signal to noise would be further enhanced accordingly.
(4) Volume. The volume at the center of the KamLAND detector is quite ample for the metal hydride. It is feasible
to enhance the “excess heat” power level by a factor of 10–100 just based on the volumetric effect.


4. Weak Interactions

Three kinds of weak interactions are in consideration: K-electron capture, electron-catalyzed fusion reaction, and
Mitsubishi–Iwamura type of nuclear transmutation.
(1) K-electron capture. K-shell electron of deuterium atom might be captured by the deuteron with very little
probability. There are two factors which might change this situation. (i) The selective resonant tunneling is
favorable to the low probability process; (ii) The K-electron would have much more chance to interact with the
deuteron of which the wave function is a linear combination of two states: the helium-like excited state and the
deuterium molecule-like crystal trapped state.
(2) Electron-catalyzed fusion. The electron might be captured by a tunneling deuteron, and form a virtual di-neutron
in the nuclear well to produce a 4H∗ state which would be followed by a decay process to make a 4He∗ from
this 4H∗ state: i.e. It seems like an electron-catalyzed fusion reaction to emit a pair of neutrino and anti-neutrino. This anti-
neutrino emission is favorable to KamLAND detector as well. The maximum energy of this anti-neutron
is about 23 MeV, and the maximum recoil energy of 4He is about 23 MeV also when lattice is involved in
momentum conservation. These numbers may be compared with the experimental observation.
(3) Mitsubishi–Iwamura nuclear transmutation. Cesium (13355 Cs ) thin ﬁlm on the surface of a Pd–CaO–Pd super-
lattice complex might be transmuted into praseodymium (14159 Pr ) while a deuterium ﬂux is permeating through
this complex [7]. Four deuterons might be added into this cesium nucleus in terms of the electron-catalyzed
process which might be accompanied by emission of a pair of neutrino and anti-neutrino. Although it is not
quite clear about the transmutation processes, but the neutrino emission must be there if it is a weak interaction
process in nature.


5. Discussion

(1) Is electron capture by deuteron in lattice a real process? K-capture of electron in nucleus might be accompanied by a positron emission process if the mass excesses allow
this positron emission. However, during K-capture of electron in deuteron, (d+d+e → 4H∗+νe+0.372 MeV,)
the mass excesses do not allow the positron emission ( d + d → 4H∗ + νe + e+) if 4H∗ is a real one (i.e. the
mass excess of 4H∗ takes 25.9 MeV). This consists with one aspect of the experimental fact (the products
of positron annihilation, two 0.511 MeV photons, were not observed). Hence, one may expect that electron
capture by deuteron in lattice might be a real process instead of a virtual process. Nevertheless, if d + d + e →
4H∗ + νe + 0.372 MeV was a real process we were supposed to see the neutrino with single energy, and the
neutron as the decay product of the 4H∗. These are not conﬁrmed by experiments either. Indeed positron
emission was not observed just due to the selectivity of resonant tunneling. Because the 3-body products in the
channel of positron emission has a greater phase space available, its probability of transition is usually greater
than that of the 2-body product channel (i.e. electron capture channel). As a result, the life-time for positron
emission is much shorter than that of electron capture. The selectivity of resonant tunneling just picks the
longer life-time for such a thick and high Coulomb barrier at low energy (see calculation in the Proceedings of
ICCF-9 [8]). Thus, we assume that electron capture by deuteron in lattice is a virtual process.

(2) Is “excess heat” the recoil energy? If the electron capture is a virtual process, and the electron just plays the role of a catalyst; then, the energy
would be distributed among 4He, neutrino and anti-neutrino with a little energy to lattice. The energy of 4He
would be in the range from 75.8 keV to 23.8 MeV. Then we are supposed to see much more 4He than those
observed in the “excess heat” experiments. A possible explanation is that most of the 4He were trapped by
lattice. 4He would move out from lattice only if the temperature of palladium was higher than 1000oC which
is much higher than that in any electrolysis experiment or most of the gas-loading experiment.

(3) Analogy to inner conversion. When excited nucleus de-excites, the released energy may became the energy of photon, or the energy of orbital
electron. At the ﬁrst glance,it was easy to think of that the nuclear energy was transfer ﬁrst to a real photon ﬁrst;
then the photo-electric effect kicked out the orbital electron. Later it was found that the nuclear energy might
be transferred to orbital electron through a virtual photon without any photo-electric effect in between. Now
we may imagine that the nuclear energy was transferred to neutrino and anti-neutrino through a virtue electron
capture process in those weak interactions in a lattice.


6. Proposal of Experiment

All the three above-mentioned reactions emit neutrino with energy higher than 5 MeV. Hence, we may propose that
putting the metal hydride in the control room of KamLAND neutrino detector near the big liquid sphere of scintillator
to run the ﬁrst step of experiment in order to conﬁrm the emission of the neutrino, and measure the energy of those
neutrinos.

After the conﬁrmation of the neutrino emission, we may reconstruct the set-up of the metal hydride in order to
put this metal hydride into the center of the spherical liquid scintillator, and determine the spectrum of this neutrino
emission.

Early in 1989, the ﬁrst generation of neutrino detector at Kamiokande was used to detect the neutron emission from
the Pd–D2O electrolytic cell. Its result of no neutron emission is still valid today, and becomes the foundation of the
theory of the selective resonant tunneling in condensed matter nuclear science. We may expect that the third generation
of the neutrino detector (KamLAND) might contribute to this greatest scientiﬁc exploration as well.

As long as the neutrino emission is conﬁrmed, we may solve a long-lasting controversial puzzle in the scientiﬁc
world, and a nuclear energy without strong nuclear contamination is thus feasible.


References

Xing Z. Li, Jian Tian, Ming Y. Mei, Chong X. Li, Sub-barrier fusion and selective resonant tunneling, Phys. Rev. C 61 (2000)
Xing Z. Li, Bin Liu, Si Chen, Qing Ming Wei, and Heinrich Hora, Fusion cross-sections for inertial fusion energy, Laser Part.
Beam 22 (2004) 469 .
J. Kasagi et al., Energetic protons and alpha particles emitted in 150-keV deuteron bombardment on deuterated Ti, J. Phys.
Soc. Japan 64(3) (1995) 778 .
A. Takahashi et al., Anomalous enhancement of three-body deuteron fusion in titanium-deuteride with low-energy D+ beam
implantation,Fusion Technol. 34 (1998) 256 .
G. Fralick et al., Results of an attempt to measure increased rates of the reaction D + D −→ 3He + n in a Nonelectrochemical
Cold Fusion Experiment, NASA Tech. Memo. (1989) 102430.
Xing Z. Li et al., Correlation between abnormal deuterium ﬂux and heat ﬂow in a D/Pd system, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 36
(2003) 3095–3097.
Y. Iwamura et al., Elemental Analysis of Pd Complexes: Effects of D2 gas permeation, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 41 (2002) 4642.
Si Chen, X.Z. Li, Tritium production and selective resonant tunneling model, in: X.Z. Li (Ed.), Proceedings of ICCF-9
(Tsinghua University Press, Beijing China, May 19–24, 2003) 2002, 42.
