Abstract

This paper reports a protocol that consists of applying concurrent electronic and photonic stimuli in a cell with two or more electrodes
at or near the boiling point of the liquid. The liquid in the cell is a solution including a silicate, a lithium salt, and a surfactant. The
electrical stimuli are RF signals and, optionally, a direct current. The protocol generates an exothermic reaction characterized by
sharp temperature transients. We have successfully used three different silicates and four different metals for electrodes. We believe
the exothermic reaction is nuclear in nature. The evidence supporting that statement includes:
• Data logs show brief, intense temperature transients.
• Electron diffraction scattering (EDS) analyses show elements to be present after the reaction that could be transmutation
products of several elements in the ingredients of the protocol, specifically including silver, a possible transmutation
product of palladium.
• Auger analysis of one experiment also shows evidence of transmutation of the elements in the reaction cell.
• SEM photos show “volcanic sites” and other evidence of metal migration.
• Other SEM photos show large areas where electrodes have spalled during experiments.


1. Background

We hypothesized that using a lower surface tension electrolyte in the Fleischman–Pons experiment would better wet
the Pd electrode, leading to more efficient reaction and possibly greater excess heat. Anionic silica hydride was chosen
because it is a soluble silicate known to have surfactant properties, but not to have a surfactant tail, which we wanted to avoid. Anionic silica hydride is commercially marketed for human consumption as an alternative health care product
in both a liquid and crystalline form. The liquid is called Super Hydrate and the crystalline is called Mega H− [1]. It
is reported to lower surface tension of water from 72 to 48 dynes/cm [2].

Dr. Michael McKubre told one of the authors in a conversation at SRI International that three things have been
demonstrated to stimulate LENRs: electricity, light, and vibration. We chose to apply all three at once, with the vibratory
stimulation introduced as a pulse-modulated RF sine wave. That latter technique is used to simulate percussion signals
in electronic circuit simulations.

Our experiments required two hours or more gestation time before bursts of heat occurred. We suspected that
something must be changing either with the solution or the electrodes in that period that facilitated the observed
reaction. To the best of our knowledge, all of the successful LENR experiments conducted either by us or other
experimenters have included lithium in the reaction, so lithium appears to be an essential ingredient. Reasoning that
both silica and lithium are needed in the reaction and that the reaction does not occur immediately, we suspected that
the anionic silica hydride and the lithium in our protocol might form a compound (coordination or stronger) before
the reaction occurs. To test that hypothesis, we substituted two other silicates for the anionic silica hydride–lithium
metasilicate, Li2SiO3, and sodium metasilicate, Na2SiO3.


2. Experimental Setup

The reactor used was a stainless steel cylinder with a central well 5.08 cm deep and 5.08 cm in diameter, having a closed
bottom and a removable top.

A photograph of the vessel is shown in Fig. 1. It was dimensioned to accommodate
a glass beaker capped with a quartz top. Electrodes and thermocouples passed through holes in the top.

Four “ultrabright” white LEDs, capable of generating 15,000 mcd each, were spaced equally around the vessel
below the surface of the liquid as photonic stimuli. These stimuli were provided through sealed glass ports in the vessel
wall.

The electrical stimuli were provided via three electrodes of 0.63 mm diameter: a common cathode, an anode for the
RF stimulus, and a second optional anode for the DC stimulus. The electrodes formed a triangle with sides 2.3, 3.7,
and 3.7 cm long. The shortest side lay between the RF anode and the common cathode. The electronic stimulus was
a signal generated by an arbitrary waveform generator (AWG). The RF sine wave had a frequency of 3.1 MHz and the
modulating pulse waveform was 48 MHz with a 50% duty cycle. Those frequencies were chosen for purely intuitive
reasons.

All three electrodes were isolated from the steel vessel and sheathed in glass tubing to the surface of the liquid in order
to keep them straight and to concentrate the RF stimulus in the liquid. The electrodes passed through the vessel’s top
via Teﬂon® seals compressed with Swagelok® ﬁttings. We have used palladium, silver, gold, and platinum electrodes
and observed similar temperature transients. All experiments were performed with electrodes of similar metals rather
than dissimilar ones.

The temperature of the liquid was monitored via thermocouple wells projecting into the liquid.

The wells were
made of stainless steel or glass, and the reaction was more robust when glass wells were substituted for the steel ones.

The thermocouple wells also passed through the vessel’s cap via Teﬂon® seals compressed with Swagelok® ﬁttings.

The electrodes and the thermocouple wells were equally spaced on a bolt circle, so thermocouples would be 2.3 and

3.7 cm away from the cathode.:

The headspace above the liquid in the vessel consisted of a static blanket of hydrogen and helium, in approximately
equal percentages.
The majority of our experiments used 30 ml. of either H2O or D2O in the cell with 1.4 g. of lithium sulfate (Li2SO4),
100 mg. of Mega H−, and 0.8 ml. of Super Hydrate. The solution was buffered with citric acid to keep it in the range
of 6.5–8.9 at the beginning of the experiments.

Brian P. Roarty and Carol J. Walker / Journal of Condensed Matter Nuclear Science 10 (2013) 30–39
Figure 1. Reaction cell, showing LEDs and ports on the side. Electrodes and thermocouple wells can be seen on the top, along with relief valves
and gas valves.

When Li2SiO3 and Na2SiO3 were used, they were mixed with EDTA to dissolve and/or suspend the silicates in the
D2O. The electrodes used in those experiments were palladium. In the experiments using either lithium metasilicate or
calcium metasilicate, the solution was buffered, using sodium bicarbonate, to keep 6.5 <pH< 8.9.

The input heater power was determined by measuring the voltage and current applied to a heating coil, located in
a cavity in the bottom of the vessel.

The temperature of the vessel was initially raised to 101˚C ± 1˚C. After the
temperature of the liquid had remained stable within that range for at least two hours, we applied the photonic and RF
stimuli. Temperature was controlled by manually adjusting the input power to the heating coil. We did not attempt to
deliberately raise the temperature of the solution above the boiling point or to measure pressure.

In latter experiments we applied a signal consisting of a 3.1 MHz fundamental sine wave modulated by a smaller

43.4 MHz sine wave. After reaching equilibrium near the boiling point of the solution, the applied stimuli add less than:
100mW of incremental power to initiate the reaction [3,4].

As a safety practice appropriate when working with exothermic reactions in a sealed vessel at or near the boiling
point of water, our vessel was equipped with two relief valves set to lift sequentially at different pressures. We strongly
recommend that others replicating this protocol do the same thing.


3. Results

Figure 2 shows a datalog from Experiment No. 1, where the horizontal axis is two minutes per division and the vertical
axis is either 1˚C or 1 V, as appropriate for the variable measured. Data was logged at 10-second intervals. The
experiment was conducted with palladium electrodes in heavy water. The electrolyte was lithium sulfate and the silica
reagent was anionic silica hydride. The time-varying electrical stimulus was the sinusoidally modulated pulse stream
described above.
• The data was logged with an Agilent 34970A Data Acquisition Unit, which uses a proprietary database system,
Brian P. Roarty and Carol J. Walker / Journal of Condensed Matter Nuclear Science 10 (2013) 30–39
Figure 2. Experiment No. 1 data log showing temperature spikes. Experiment used Pd electrodes, anionic silica hydride, and lithium sulfate as an
electrolyte in predominately heavy water.
preventing modiﬁcation of the raw data. All data logs shown are cropped screen prints from Agilent’s Data
Logger 3 software.
• The temperatures of the solution are shown with traces 104 and 105, with a centerline of 102˚C. The data log
shows at least four distinct bursts of heat that had notable periodicity, occurring at intervals of approximately

13 min. The data was logged at ten-second intervals, so the largest burst rises more than 1.4˚C in 10 s.

• Note that the temperatures of the heating coil (trace 102) and the vessel wall (trace 103) drop after each burst,
possibly caused by the vessel leaking some steam or venting through the relief valves. (We consistently noted
the loss of approximately one-third of the liquid in the vessel during our experiments when the temperature
transients occurred, and that would consistent with steam leaking or venting. Such losses were not observed
when the transients were not observed and the reaction presumably did not occur.)
• Note also that the DC stimulus current (trace 109) spikes concurrent with or slightly before the bursts occur.

Those current spikes suggest that the resistance between the DC anode and the common cathode decreased at
approximately the same time the temperature spikes were occurring.
• After treatment, portions of the wire were coated with a deposit that resembled a ﬁeld of bubbles when viewed
in a SEM. However, they were solid rather than hollow.
• We do not claim that this particular data log is representative of all of our experiments. It shows the pattern
of the thermal behavior more distinctly than was typical and also shows the current spikes in the DC stimulus
better than our other experiments did.

Brian P. Roarty and Carol J. Walker / Journal of Condensed Matter Nuclear Science 10 (2013) 30–39
Figure 3. Experiment No. 3 data log showing temperature spikes. Experiment used Pd electrodes, anionic silica hydride, and lithium sulfate as an
electrolyte in predominately heavy water.

Glass beads purchased from a craft store were threaded onto the palladium wire for Experiment No. 2, whose
results are shown in Fig. 3.
• The electrodes for this experiment were palladium in a solution of heavy water. The electrolyte was lithium sul-
fate and the silica reagent was anionic silica hydride. The time-varying electrical stimulus was the sinusoidally
modulated pulse stream described above.
• The reaction kicked in at a relatively low temperature, just above 100˚C, and showed some sustained bursts
lasting as long as 5 min. The temperature of the solution (traces 104 and 105) peaked at 102.4˚C. Note that
the temperature spikes last longer than the ones seen in the experiment shown in Fig. 2, presumably meaning
more heat was generated with the presence of glass beads.
• There is a strong reaction before the DC stimulus voltage (trace 107) was applied. For that reason, we only
used two electrodes, the RF anode and the cathode, in most of our later experiments.
• When viewed in the SEM with the glass beads removed, there were no deposits on this wire and signiﬁcant
portions of the wire had spalled and peeled away. Spalling is caused by stress and could suggest local high
temperatures. Figure 4 is a micrograph of a piece of electrode that spalled and became twisted during the
experiment.

The data log for Experiment No. 3 using lithium metasilicate instead of anionic silica hydride is shown in Fig. 5.

The boiling point of this solution was higher than that in the standard protocol, so the centerline of the two traces (104
and 105) for the thermocouples is 104◦C. There were some bursts of heat, but they were not periodic. The data log
from one thermocouple showed one of those bursts rose approximately 1.8◦C in 20 s.

Brian P. Roarty and Carol J. Walker / Journal of Condensed Matter Nuclear Science 10 (2013) 30–39
Figure 4. Spalled portion of Pd cathode after treatment with protocol. This experiment included glass beads on the cathode. Such spalling was
only seen when glass beads were used.

The data logs from the experiment with sodium metasilicate showed a temperature transient, albeit a small one.

Figure 6 shows a “volcanic site” observed during SEM analysis of a gold electrode after treatment with the protocol.

Interestingly, gold does not form a hydride at or near the boiling point of water, so that means its metal lattice is not
being loaded with either hydrogen or deuterium atoms during the protocol. That suggests that the reaction is not driven
by the interaction of those atoms while they are immobilized in the metal lattice and allowed to interact in ways that
are stochastically impossible as gases, as was postulated by Fleischman and Pons to cause “cold fusion”. Something
else is going on with this protocol besides that reaction.

We have performed three experiments where the BES analyses of the electrodes show the presence of silver,
a possible transmutation product of palladium. We have also observed in SEM examinations that the apparently
transmuted material is often associated with different morphologies than the surrounding palladium. Figure 7 shows
a SEM photo and its accompanying BES spectra of the treated surface of a palladium cathode; silver is shown to be
present on the surface. A similar BES analysis of the interior of the untreated interior of the wire did not show the
presence of silver.

BES analysis also detected the presence of nitrogen, ﬂuorine, aluminum, and chlorine during various experiments,
which could be transmutation products of elements added to the reactor, assuming these elements undergo Beta decay.

The cathode from one of those three experiments was also analyzed using Auger spectroscopy. That analysis showed
the presence of nitrogen, aluminum, chlorine, calcium, and zinc. Each of these also could be a transmutation product
of one of the elements added to the reactor, again assuming those elements undergo Beta decay
The results of the BES and Auger analysis are summarized in Table 1. The left-hand column shows the elements
added to the reactor. The next column shows the possible transmutation products of those initial elements. Both BES
and Auger analysis have detection limits of 1%, and both kinds of analysis show ﬁve possible transmutation products
to be present. Magnesium is both an ingredient and a possible transmutation product, so its presence is not indicative
of a transmutation. The ﬁelds that are labeled “NA” indicate that the respective method does not detect the presence of
those elements with lower atomic numbers. Na and Cu are shown in red because they were not listed as ingredients in
Brian P. Roarty and Carol J. Walker / Journal of Condensed Matter Nuclear Science 10 (2013) 30–39
Figure 5. Experiment #3 used Pd electrodes, lithium metasilicate, and lithium sulfate as an electrolyte in predominately heavy water. Glass beads
were strung onto the cathode.
the anionic silica hydride; they were presumably contaminants (Table 1).

Table 1. Shows the ingredient elements in the proto-
col, the possible transmutation products if the transmu-
tation consists of a neutron converting to a proton, and
which elements were detected in EDS and Auger analyses
Ingredient
Transmutation
EDS
Auger
1H
2He
NA
NA
3Li
4Be
NA
6C
7N
Available
Available
8O
9F
Available
11Na
12Mg
Available
Available
12Mg
13Al
Available
Available
14Si
15P
16S
17Cl
Available
Available
19K
20Ca
Available
29Cu
30Zn
Available
46Pd
47Ag
Available
Brian P. Roarty and Carol J. Walker / Journal of Condensed Matter Nuclear Science 10 (2013) 30–39
Figure 6. SEM photo showing a “volcanic site” on a gold electrode.

It is important to note that we only saw temperature transients when the solution was within 6◦C of the solution’s
boiling point, and more typically when it was within 2◦C of it. We suspect the reaction we are reporting either only
takes place at or near the boiling point or only takes place robustly enough to generate the temperature transients
Also, interestingly, experiments conducted with red and blue LEDs instead of white ones did not result in a reaction.

Finally, three things were found to inhibit the reaction: (1) rubber in the reactor, (2) direct contact with Teﬂon®,
and (3) using ultra-pure palladium (99.999%) for electrodes.


4. Conclusion

We conclude that the experimental results above show an exothermic reaction can be generated when a solution including
a lithium salt and a silicate is stimulated with modulated electrical and photonic stimuli provided by white LEDs. The
reaction presents sharp temperature transients. Examination of the electrodes after the experiments showed evidence
of thermal stress in spalling and of material ﬂow in volcanic sites.

Anomalous temperature excursions were observed when using soluble anionic silica hydride, silica (glass or quartz)
containers and not when using stainless steel or Teﬂon®. The reaction was also more robust when glass beads were
threaded onto one of the electrodes and when glass thermocouple wells were substituted for steel ones. Hence, the
presence of silica in the reactor proved to be a critical to yielding anomalous heat.

The experiments demonstrated similar heat signatures when conducted with lithium metasilicate, anionic silica
Brian P. Roarty and Carol J. Walker / Journal of Condensed Matter Nuclear Science 10 (2013) 30–39
Figure 7. SEM photo of treated surface of a Pd electrode and accompanying EDS analysis showing the presence of Ag, a possible transmutation
product of Pd.
hydride, and sodium metasilicate, with the reactions showing a stronger reaction with the silicates in that order. We
believe those results support the reasoning that silica is critical to the reaction and that lithium silicate promotes a
stronger reaction.

We detected evidence of possible transmutation products of as many as six different elements using two different
analytic techniques, EDS and Auger analysis. Taken together, the data suggest that our protocol may have induced
nuclear reactions on numerous occasions.


References

Cory J. Stephanson and G. Patrick Flanagan, Synthesis of a novel anionic hydride organosiloxane presenting biochemical
properties, Int. J, Hydrogen Energy 28 (2003) 1243–1250; Also available online at
http://www.ressourcement.info/Synthesis%20of%20a%20novel%20anionic%20hydride%20organosiloxane.pdf
Cory J. Stephanson and G. Patrick Flanagan, Quantitative Analysis of Membrane Diffusion Kinetics and Surface Tension
Differentiation by a Colloidal Silicate Mineral, available online at http://www.phisciences.com/20050516CE.pdf
Brian P. Roarty and Carol J. Walker / Journal of Condensed Matter Nuclear Science 10 (2013) 30–39
An early version of the protocol using anionic silica hydride is described more fully in United States Patent 7,442,287. It is
available online at uspto.gov.
The version of the protocol using lithium metasilicate is described more fully in United States patent application 20110174632.
It is available online at us pto.gov.
