
A LARGE SOLID ANGLE MUL TIPARAMETER NEUTRON DETECTORPulse shape discriminator channels 

G. Ricco, M. Anghinolfi, P. Corvisiero, P. Prati and M.Taiuti
Dipartimento di Fisica and INFN,via Dodecaneso 33, 16146, Genova, Italy C. Boragno; R. Eggenhoffner, U. Valbusa
Dipartimento di Fisica and INFM,via Dodecaneso 33, 16146, Genova, Italy


Abstracts

We present the results of recent measurements, performed in Genoa
with a novel neutron detector, on some titanium-deuterium systems. In
spite of the good detector sensitivity, better of the one claimed by
Jones and co-workers, no neutron emission was foun


Introduction


After the first claims about the so called "cold fusion" phenomenum
[1,2,3]a new, multiparameter, high efficiency neutron detector [4] was
specifically designed in Genoa for cold fusion measurements and used
in some typical experiments on titanium-deuterium gas systems. Our
aim was to verify, with an improved neutron sensitivity, the results
reported by Scaramuzzi and co-workers [3] and to investigate neutron
emission during high deuterium adsorption in the titanium lattice. cylindrical sample can be inserted in the central hole. The NE213 light
pulse has different decay times when produced by gamma rays or by
neutrons: a pulse shape discriminator, oper ating on the inner
scintillator pulses, efficiently separates gamma from neutron events.
Due to the relatively large detector dimensions, a very high fraction of
neutrons giving a signal in the liquid scintillator thermalizes and is
captured by cadmium foils. Each neutron event in the liquid scintillator
gives the START to a Time-to-Amplitude Converter that will wait 200
μs for the STOP from gammas rays produced by neutron capture on one
cadmium sheet and detected by at least one of the three coaxial
scintillators. A neutron event is identified by two consecutive trigger
signals: the first corresponding to a neutron type pulse in the liquid
scintillator and the second to the detection of capture gamma rays
within the 200 μs time window. For each event the linear amplitude of
the summed three scintillators pulses, proportional to the neutron
energy, is recorded. The acquisition system, based on a CAMAC
interface connected to a MICROVAX computer, allows off-line
multiparameter analysis: as an example in fig. 2 is shown the pulseshape
and pulse-height correlation. The signals from the scintillators
are stored on the computer each minute: in this way time trends can be
monitored. The detection efficiency for 2.45 MeV monochromatic
neutrons turned out (12.5 ± 0.5) %. For neutron energies below 2.45 MeV
the background rate is 1 o- 2 n/s and the detection sensitivity turns out
to be 2.4 ·T-112 n/s, where T is the measure time.

The system used to load titanium with deuterium gas is sketched in fig.
3. Before admit 0 2 gas in the cell, the system was evacuated up to 1 o- 6
mbar by a turbomolecular pump. In a second step the gas was inserted
in the dead volume (200 cc) flowing through a liquid nitrogen trap to
promote impurities condensation. Finally, the gas was admitted in the
cell through the valve V4. A manometer, with sensitivity 0.2 bar, was
used to measure the pressure drop vs. time and then to estimate the adsorption rate of the titanium.


Experimental Set-up

As shown in fig. 1 the detector is composed of three cylindrical coaxial
scintillators shells, each shell being 20 cm long and about 5 cm
thick [4]. The inner shell is filled with NE213 liquid scintillator and the
outer two are plastic NE102A. Cadmium sheets 1 mm thic k are
interposed between the scintillators to capture neutrons thermalized
inside the detector. An anticoincidence cosmic ray detector is placed
over the neutron detector and the whole system is surrounded by a
paraffin {20 cm) +c opper {2 cm)+lead {10 cm) wall. A 30 cm

Measurements 

We have performed measurements with two kinds of titanium samples: 
shavings and powders [5]:

a) Tjtanjum shayjngs: 24 g of titanium shaving were placed inside the
cell without any kind of thermal treatment. The dead volume was then
filled, at room temperature, with deuterium gas at a 16.5 bar pressure
and the valve connecting the dead volume with the cell was opened:
neither pressure nor cell temperature variations were observed. In
these conditions a 5 h measurement was performed and the neutron
rate turned out compatible with the background level. After this first
step the liquid nitrogen was admitted in the cryostat: the cell
temperature went down to 77 K in about 1 0 minutes, then the liquid
nitrogen was closed and the temperature went back to room
temperature in about 4 hours. This thermal cycle was repeated
consecutively 4 times. During all the cycles neither pressure variation
nor neutron emission were observed. We assumed a deuterium
absorption corresponding to the minimum pressure variation detectable
with our system (0.2 bar): the parameter "fus• defined as the fusion
rate per deuteron pair, turned out lower than 1 o- 23 fus/D pair/s. 

b) Tjtanjum powder: 32 g of titanium powder were inserted in the cell
and degassed by pumping and heating 2 h at 200 °c. Temperature was
eventually raised up to 560 °C and the cell was maintained at this
constant temperature in high vacuum conditions for approximately 7 h.

The sample was then inserted in the detector and the dead volume was
filled with 16 bar of deuterium gas. When the deuterium was admitted
in the cell the pressure went down to zero bar in a few minutes and
the cell temperature increased up to 600 C0

• During this fast transient

a neutron measurement was performed but no emission was detected.

Then, a longer measurement (15 hours) was performed holding the 
s stem in the same conditions, once again no neutrons emission was 
observed. After this first loading the dead volume was filled again with 
10 bar of deuterium gas: when the deuterium was admitted in the cell 
_the pressure in the dead volume went down to 8 bar and the cell 

temperature increased by 4 C0

• We concluded that the sample was now 
loaded of deuterium at the maximum level and in these condition-s we 
performed .the following measurements: 
- a 10 hours run with the titanium-deuterium system in stationary

conditions
- two consecutively runs during thermal transients induced by filling
the cryostat with liquid nitrogen.

During all the measurements no neutron emission was observed: since
we evaluated, from the dead volume pressure variation, a deuterium to
titanium ratio in the sample of about 0.65, the Afu,s parameter in these
runs was lower than 1 o- 25 fus/D pair/s. 


Conclusions 

Some measurements on deuterium-titanium systems were performed 
without observing any neutron signal above the background level also 
with a high deuterium absorption inside the titanium lattice. The 
experimental conditions was very similar, but not completely 
equivalent, to those of Scaramuzzi and co-workers [3]: in particular the 
thermal transients induced in the cell was slower and the 
multiparameter analysis performed on the detector signals had a dead 
time of 200 µs. 


References 

[1] S. E. Jones, E. P. Palmer, J. B. Czirr, D. L. Decker, G. L. Jensen, J. M.
Thorne and S. F. Taylor: Nature, 338,737 (1989)
[2] M. Fleischmann, S. Pons and M. Hawkins: J. Electroanal. Chem., 261,
187, 301 (1989)
[3] A. De Ninno, A. Frattolillo, G. Lollobattista, L. Martinis, M. Martone, L.
Mori, S. Podda and F. Scaramuzzi: Europhys. Lett., 9, 221 (1989)
[4] G. Ricco, M. Anghinolfi, P. Corvisiero, E. Durante, S. Maggiolo, P.
Prati, A. Rottura and M. Taiuti: "A large solid angle multiparameter
neutron detector", Nucl. Instr. and Meth., in press.
[5] P. Prati, G. Ricco, M. Taiuti, C. Boragno, R. Eggenhoffner and U.
Valbusa: "Search for neutron emission from titanium-deuterium
systems", to be published.
