1. Introduction

Although much work remains to be done in the understanding and reduction to practice of Low Energy Nuclear Reactions
(LENR), the body of experimental data accumulated over the past 25 years contains a wealth of clues to inspire and
guide the LENR community. For example, since the early 1990s it has been known [1] that the amount of excess
heat measured in a typical electrochemical LENR experiment can be increased by the appropriate application of a
DC magnetic field. The Bockris Group at Texas A&M also reported [1] increased excess heat when their cells were
stimulated with very high frequency (VHF) and ultra high frequency (UHF) electromagnetic fields. Finally, Letts and
Hagelstein [2] reported excess heat when they focused the beams of two visible frequency lasers upon the cathodes
in their Fleischmann–Pons cells, especially when the frequency difference between the two lasers corresponded to the
THz atomic vibrational frequencies preferred by the PdH and PdD lattices. They also found that the best results were
obtained when a DC magnetic ﬁeld measuring about 700 Gauss was applied across the face of their Pd foil cathodes.
As a result of these observations, a number of LENR community members believe that there are profound connections
among LENR phenomena, atomic vibrations, and electromagnetic ﬁelds.

Experimental evidence also suggests that certain metal oxides may have a role in the LENR mechanism(s). For
example, as we discuss in detail below, the layered structures used successfully by Iwamura et al. [3] contain thin ﬁlms
of CaO in addition to the expected Pd. And one of the well-known Arata structures [4] contains nanoparticles of Pd
embedded in a nonconducting matrix of zirconium dioxide. However, the choice of oxide is apparently not arbitrary,
because the Iwamura team also reported that using thin ﬁlms of MgO instead of CaO yielded negative experimental
results.

This paper presents the results of Density Functional Theory (DFT) computations performed to study itinerant
ferromagnetism in elemental transition metals and strained layer superlattices of binary composition. Section 2 provides
a short introduction to Density Functional Theory. Section 3 discusses the basic results, including the cross checks done
to ensure credibility and physicality of the DFT output, extraction of values for the equilibrium lattice constant, and the
lifting of the degeneracy between spin-up and spin-down electron energy eigenvalues. Section 4 presents our results
on the ground state lattice energy and absolute magnetization versus lattice constant and introduces the concept of
normalized asymptotic magnetization per unpaired valence electron spin. Section 5 discusses the experimental results
reported by the Mitsubishi Heavy Industries (MHI) team led by Yasuhiro Iwamura and interprets them in light of the
DFT spin-polarized results of this work. Section 6 presents the results of a DFT supercell study of the CaO:Pd interface
and illustrates the degree of spin polarization of the various atomic species in the structure. Section 7 discusses the
experimental results ofYoshiakiArata in light of our DFT ﬁndings, and Section 8 contains the results of a DFT supercell
study of the ZrO2:Pd interface that may affect the Arata results in roughly the same way that the CaO:Pd interface
affects the MHI results. Finally, Section 9 summarizes our results.


2. Density Functional Theory

Density Functional Theory (DFT) is a mathematical procedure that can be used to simulate small clusters of atoms
and calculate from ﬁrst principles (with essentially no adjustable parameters) many important physical properties such
as ground state energy, lattice stress, electronic structure, phonon dispersion curves, and many more, given only the
positions and atomic species for each atom in the cluster. Software implementing DFT makes use of the periodic
symmetry of an ordered crystal lattice so that a ﬁnite-scope calculation based on a single unit cell of an ordered lattice
can often produce results that approximate the bulk properties of a macroscopic sample of the material.

The algorithms used in such calculations originated in a mathematical proof in which Hohenberg and Kohn [5]
presented a variational principle for obtaining the ground state energy of an electronic system, a principle that introduces
a universal functional of the electron density F[n(⃗r)]. Once this functional is computed by whatever means, the ground
state energy in an arbitrary external potential can be obtained. The following year, Kohn and Sham [6] published a
seminal paper in which they derived a highly nonlinear partial differential equation system that can be solved with a
self-consistent, iterative algorithm to calculate the electron density versus position in an atomic system under study.

Several software packages implementing DFT are available. For this particular project, we chose Quantum Espresso,
mainly because it has an excellent track record, it is available at no cost through the Web, and one of us (DeChiaro) had
acquired several years’ prior experience using Espresso in the academic domain. Further details, including the

Figure 1.Lattice energy (left vertical axis) and stress (right vertical axis) curves vs. lattice constant for the paramagnetic solution of the transition
metal ruthenium. Computed energy points are connected by solid green straight line segments, while the computed stress points are connected by
dotted red straight line segments. The equilibrium lattice constant was found by ﬁtting the three lowest energy points to a second order polynomial
and then solving this to ﬁnd the point of zero slope. The error between this value and the accepted value of lattice constant is about 2.7%.
algorithms used to solve the Kohn–Sham equation in a self-consistent iterative manner, are available in Giannozzi
et al. [7], and the interested reader is directed to this publication.

Users of such software packages must be aware of a number of limitations and caveats. Each atomic species is
represented by a pseudopotential ﬁle that approximates the effects of the atomic nucleus and the core electrons upon
the valence electrons – but without the mathematically problematic “wiggles” and frequent zero crossings exhibited
by the actual wave function. The generation of such pseudopotential ﬁles requires a parametrization procedure that
vastly reduces the computational resources needed but also introduces certain errors. In general, we have obtained
reasonably good results when using pseudopotential ﬁles parametrized with the Perdew, Becke, and Ernzerhof (PBE)
generalized gradient approximation. However, in some cases, we employed Perdew-Zunger local density approximation
pseudopotentials, generally because PBE pseudopotentials either might not be available for all elements or because the
PZ potentials provide better agreement with experiment for some observable quantities. In any event, one should state
which of the several different types of pseudopotential ﬁles were used, and these can be found in Appendix A for this
work.


3. Basic Results: Extraction of the Lattice Constant

The ultimate success or failure of any computational model rests upon the degree to which it can accurately predict
observable quantities such as the lattice constant. The DFT has had good success in accurately modeling many of the
atoms in the Periodic Table, provided that one uses pseudopotential ﬁles that have been carefully tested and have good
transferability characteristics. The two sections of the Table where the DFT success has been quite limited are the
Lanthanide and the Actinide Series, primarily due to the difﬁculty in modeling the incomplete f-shells of those series.

Figure 1 shows the computed results for ruthenium, a typical example of a well-behaved species near the center of
the Transition Metal Group. The reader will note that the extracted value of lattice constant corresponding to the energy
minimum is in excellent agreement with the zero crossing of the lattice stress curve. This is a necessary but not sufﬁcient
condition to ensure that the calculated results are physically meaningful. One of the other important conditions that
must be satisﬁed is a reasonable agreement (less than 5% error) between the extracted value of equilibrium lattice
constant and the accepted value. Some of the elements crystallize in multiple lattice types and/or are characterized by
multiple c/a ratios in the literature, however in all cases it was possible to ﬁnd a structure that was stable and yielded
good agreement between computed and accepted values of lattice constant. For most of the elements, we employed
values from Wyckoff for the accepted lattice constants. Appendix A contains a table that compares the computed and
accepted values of lattice constant for all the atomic species in this study. The mean absolute value of all these errors
is about 1.565%, conﬁrming the published results that DFT is reasonably successful in modeling the behavior of most
of the atomic species of the Periodic Table in their elemental lattice form.

One further caveat that should be borne in mind when interpreting these results has to do with the crystal structures.
We employed the lattice types, space groups, and atomic coordinates as speciﬁed in Wyckoff for one of the structures

Figure 2.Electron energy relative to the Fermi level vs. lattice constant for the ferromagnetic solution of the transition metal ruthenium. Computed
points on the spin-up bands are connected by solid straight line segments, while the points on the spin-down bands are connected by dotted straight
line segments. The light green and red curves illustrate the two bands lying closest to the Fermi level, while the dark green and blue curves illustrate
the two bands lying furthest from the Fermi level.


Figure 3.Ground state lattice energy (left vertical axis) in Rydbergs and absolute magnetization (right vertical axis) for tungsten versus BCC lattice
constant in Angstroms. The green squares show the ground state energy for the ferromagnetic solution, while the small red squares show the energy
for the paramagnetic solution. The blue diamonds show absolute magnetization in Bohr Magnetons per unit cell, and the red hour-glass symbols
show magnetization values at key points calculated with a very dense mesh of k points to ensure maximum accuracy.

that is in equilibrium at room temperature. The abscissas of the plots presented in this work include values of lattice
constant corresponding to high tensile stress. Such stress represents a departure from equilibrium conditions that will
signiﬁcantly elevate the lattice energy. All materials are limited in the associated strain they can support without physical
destruction of the lattice. Atomic systems also possess a number of mechanisms to reduce their energy, even when
the strain lies below the threshold for catastrophic destruction. These include the nucleation of lattice defects such as
dislocations, the possibility of a phase transition to a different lattice type and space group, and even the growth of
whiskers (for which high purity silver and tin are both notorious). Some of these phase transitions are accompanied
by physical displacement of the atoms, for example, when a face-centered cubic (FCC) lattice undergoes a tetragonal
distortion as the result of an applied stress ﬁeld. Other phase transitions, however, do not displace the atoms but instead
cause a change in electronic structure that gives rise to a collective phenomenon known as itinerant ferromagnetism.
Materials that exhibit this latter type of phase transition are characterized by a critical threshold value of lattice constant
at which the numerical solution to the Kohn–Sham equation suddenly bifurcates into two distinct solutions. One of
these is paramagnetic and joins continuously and smoothly with the paramagnetic behavior found below the threshold.
However, the other solution is ferromagnetic in nature and may exhibit discontinuities in the derivatives of certain
parameters as it joins with the paramagnetic solution at the threshold value of lattice constant. One of those parameters
is the electronic band structure, which bifurcates at the threshold into two distinct sets of energy bands, one for the
spin-up electrons, the other for the spin-down electrons. This bifurcation usually does not affect the deep core states,
but will signiﬁcantly perturb the energy bands lying near the Fermi surface. To illustrate an example of this behavior,
we return to the case of ruthenium.

Figure 4.Ground state lattice energy (left vertical axes) in Rydbergs and absolute magnetization (right vertical axes) for polonium (upper left),
nickel (upper right), aluminum (lower left), and osmium (lower right) versus lattice constant in Angstroms. Once again, the green squares show the
ground state energies for the ferromagnetic solutions, while the small red squares show the energies for the paramagnetic solutions. The dark blue
curves show absolute magnetizations in Bohr Magnetons per unit cell, and the thin black parabolic line on the polonium plot shows the regression
polynomial that was ﬁtted to the several points near the energy minimum and used to extract a value for the equilibrium lattice constant.

Figure 2 shows the electron energy eigenvalues (relative to the Fermi energy) plotted as a function of lattice
constant for four spin-up and four spin-down energy bands at the center of the Brillouin zone (k = 0) where the electron
momentum vanishes. Two of these energy bands lie below the Fermi surface, while the other two lie above it. The two
bands lying closest to the Fermi surface are shown plotted in brighter colors, while the two lying furthest are plotted
in darker colors. It is evident that the two brighter colored plots showing the bands lying closest to the Fermi surface
exhibit considerably more splitting than the bands lying further from the surface.


4. Lattice Ground State Energy and Absolute Magnetization

The two most important lattice parameters to be considered in this work are the ground state energy and the magnetization
of the lattice. The overall lattice ground state energy is the primary quantity used by Quantum Espresso in governing
the self-consistent ﬁeld (SCF) iterative solution of the Kohn–Sham equation. This ground state energy is normally
given in units of Rydbergs (the energy level for the solitary 1s electron in hydrogen is −1.0 Rydberg or −13.6 eV), and
the SCF iteration normally proceeds until the estimated iterative increment in this quantity falls below a user-speciﬁed
threshold that is typically 10−8 Rydberg. Magnetization is calculated as the spin-up minus the spin-down charge density
versus position in the three dimensional working volume of the structure speciﬁed by the user in the input ﬁle. These
two spin-polarized charge densities are normally identically equal in materials that have no absolute magnetization

Figure 5.Histogram plot showing the distribution of the computed asymptotic magnetization for the elements after normalization to yield the
absolute magnetization per unpaired electron spin. The width of each numerical bin is 0.1, and each vertical bar contains the chemical symbols of
the various elements whose normalized asymptotic magnetizations fall in its respective bin. The tall bar at 0 on the left shows the 20 elements whose
outermost electron shells contain only s electrons; they do not develop ferromagnetic activity when placed under high tensile stress.

and where the spin-up and spin-down electron energies are everywhere equal. However, as can be seen in Fig. 2, one
of the spin-up energy bands crosses the Fermi surface at a lattice constant value near 3.2Å, while the corresponding
spin-down band remains above the surface.

Since the electron occupation numbers (as speciﬁed by the Fermi–Dirac distribution) rapidly drop toward zero as
one crosses the Fermi Surface from below, the spin-up band will be ﬁlled at k = 0 while the spin-down band will not
be ﬁlled. Thus, we expect that the system will begin to show a nonvanishing magnetization, and the ground state lattice
energies for the paramagnetic and the ferromagnetic solutions may begin to diverge from one another. This behavior
is illustrated in Fig. 3, where we present ground state energies for the paramagnetic and ferromagnetic solutions and
absolute magnetization (proportional to
�
| ρup −ρdown | d3V ) versus lattice constant for the transition metal tungsten.

Initial conditions speciﬁed in the input ﬁles were chosen to encourage the system to converge to either the param-
agnetic or the ferromagnetic solution. For all points to the left of the threshold value of about 4.32Å, the ferromagnetic
solution does not exist, and the code always converged to the paramagnetic solution, regardless of initial conditions.
However, for points above threshold, the two solutions coexist, and the choice of initial conditions determines which
solution will “attract” the convergence of the algorithm. The reader will note that at the threshold, we see the energy
curves for the two solutions begin to diverge. The difference between the two grows monotonically with increasing
lattice constant for tungsten in the range of lattice constants explored in this work. Not all atomic species exhibited this
monotonic increase. However in nearly all cases, the ferromagnetic energy was lower than the paramagnetic energy
at the same lattice constant, suggesting that the ferromagnetic state is the energetically preferred one. The very few
exceptions involve one or two points close to the thresholds where the numerical ﬂuctuations are very large for some el-
ements. This can cause difﬁculty in convergence and the possibility of critical ﬂuctuation noise in the results, a situation
very common in the study of thermodynamic phase transitions. Figure 4 shows results for four other elements, drawn

Figure 6.Simultaneous plots showing the ferromagnetic (green squares) and paramagnetic (small red squares) energy curve for Pd on the left
vertical axis, the magnetization of Pd on the right vertical axis when strained in two and three dimensions, and the equilibrium lattice constants for
Pd, MgO and CaO – all versus lattice constant.

from both the transition metals (Ni and Os) and the so-called sp elements (Al and Po) where the outermost valence
electrons in the isolated atoms lie in p orbitals. We see that the general trend shows a rapid increase in magnetization at
the threshold, a saturation at higher lattice constants, and in some cases, a decrease in magnetization at very high lattice
constants as seen in the Al curves. The one element from the ﬁgure that is known to be ferromagnetic under normal
conditions is nickel, and it is no coincidence that the threshold for bifurcation of the energy surface lies below the
equilibrium lattice constant. Finally, we note that the 4 elements shown in the ﬁgure exhibit considerable differences
in the rates at which the paramagnetic and ferromagnetic energy surfaces diverge above threshold. The ratio between
this energy difference and kT is likely to have a strong inﬂuence upon the rate at which the higher-energy paramagnetic
state is thermally populated at any given absolute temperature above 0K.

In the limit as the lattice constant approaches inﬁnity, the behavior of the system approaches that of isolated atoms,
for which the intrinsic electronic magnetic moment (neglecting the contribution caused by the orbital motion of the
electrons) will be equal to the number of unpaired electron spins multiplied by the Bohr Magneton. In this limit, we
would expect the total moment for a system of N decoupled identical atoms to be equal to the product of N, the number
of unpaired spins in each atom, and the Bohr magneton. This implies that if we take the total moment of the system and
normalize it by dividing by this quantity, we should obtain 1.0 Bohr magnetons per unpaired spin. The magnetization
plots shown in Fig. 4 encompass about one order of magnitude dynamic range for the peak magnetizations computed
in this work. Approximately the same can be said for the variation across the Periodic Table in the product of N and the
number of unpaired spins. If we suspect these two quantities to be correlated in real elemental lattices, then we should
be able to extract or extrapolate the maximum magnetic moment from each of the plots, perform the normalization,
and obtain a result close to 1.0 in the absence of competing effects. This exercise was performed for each of the
atomic species in this study. However, before presenting the results, we should add that it would be surprising if the

Figure 7.False color cross-sectional image of total charge density taken parallel to theYZ plane (thus along the [100] crystal plane) and intersecting
the CaO:Pd supercell. Individual atoms are labeled for clarity. This image should be used to locate the various atoms and simplify the interpretation
of the more complex spin-polarized image shown in Fig. 8.

magnetic moment contributions resulting from the electron orbital angular momenta were found to have no impact upon
the results. In fact, our calculations indicate that in one respect the orbital angular momentum quantum number does
impact the magnetizations of the elemental metals and semi-metals. Within the limits of computational precision caused
by the numerical ﬂuctuations, the magnetizations of all Column I and Column II atoms (whose outermost electron shells
are comprised entirely of s-state electrons with vanishing orbital angular momenta) are exactly zero. The same can be
said for the atoms lying along the extreme right hand edge of the Transition Metal Group (Zn, Cd, and Hg). We studied
the ﬁrst two of these and obtained zero magnetization and no ferromagnetic solutions to the Kohn-Sham Equation for
any lattice constant lying in the range of values studied herein. Most of the remaining transition metals we studied
(with the sole exceptions ofY, Ac, Ag, and Au) and some of the sp elements exhibited nonzero values of magnetization
for sufﬁciently large values of lattice constant. Figure 5 contains a plot of the probability density function censored to
the form of a histogram for the distribution of normalized peak magnetizations per unpaired spin.

With the exceptions of the elements whose outermost electron shell contains only s electrons, most of the elements
produced normalized asymptotic magnetizations that cluster fairly close to the expected value of 1.0. The element Pd
could not be plotted on Fig. 5 because the outermost shell is the 4d shell, and it is completely ﬁlled in the ground
state. Thus there are no unpaired spins at all, unless the lattice can be sufﬁciently excited to cause some of the atoms to
occupy the low-lying ﬁrst excited state corresponding to an electronic conﬁguration of 4d9 5s1. If this were the case,
then Pd would appear in the distribution at 1.125 in the tallest of the histogram bars clustered near 1.0.

Figure 8.False color cross-sectional image of absolute value of spin-up minus spin-down charge density taken parallel to the YZ plane (along the
[100] crystal plane) and intersecting the CaO:Pd supercell. A logarithmic scale was used to grade the colors in order to show all the atoms, including
the most inactive ones. Atoms that are highly spin polarized will be bright in this image, while totally inactive atoms will appear black.


5. Application to the Iwamura Structure

From 1996 to 2005 results from a series of key LENR experiments were published by a team of workers at Mitsubishi
Heavy Industries under the direction of Yasuhiro Iwamura. These results include the reported observation of excess
heat and several types of nuclear transmutations that change the atomic number of their reactant species by +4 and
the atomic mass number by +8 when deuterium is forced under a pressure difference of about 1.7 atm. through an
ABABAB sandwich structure consisting of alternating layers of Pd and a light metal oxide having the same FCC crystal
structure as Pd. Some of the Iwamura results were recently conﬁrmed by an independent team at Toyota Central
Research Laboratories [9] and published in the October, 2013 Issue of Japanese J. Appl. Phys. Iwamura et al. also
presented some of their key ﬁndings at ICCF-11 in Marseilles, France, in 2004. Among these ﬁndings are the following
observations:

(1) Transmutations are not observed when the light metal oxide layers are absent from the sandwich structure.

(2) Transmutations are not observed unless the sandwich structure is permeated with D2 under pressure.

(3) Transmutations are not observed if the light isotope of hydrogen is used instead of deuterium.

(4) Transmutations are only observed for some chemical compositions of the light metal oxide layers and not others.

In particular, when Pd is used as the transition metal layer, CaO was observed to function well, while MgO
(another oxide with the same crystal structure) did not function at all.


Figure 9.False color image of total charge density (in units of electronic charge per cubic Bohr radius) versus position after a single hydrogen
atom has been added at the octahedral site just below the calcium atom near the geometric center of the image. The hydrogen atom can be seen as a
small, purple sphere.

The Mitsubishi team suggested that two possible roles of the oxide layers are to increase the deuterium density
within the structure and to modify the surface electronic band structure of the Pd in some way that would favor the
LENR reactions. Based upon the results of our spin-polarized DFT studies, it is now possible to propose a third role
for the oxide layers: to apply a tensile stress to the Pd ﬁlms in two dimensions that is of sufﬁcient magnitude to drive at
least some fraction of the Pd atoms into their ferromagnetic state. If this third hypothesis is experimentally conﬁrmed,
we would then interpret the sandwich structure as a long period strained layer superlattice that is very similar (except
for its longer period) to those now widely employed by the integrated circuit and optoelectronic component industries
to create new materials with novel and highly optimized properties.

Figure 6 presents results that help explain how the strained layer superlattice hypothesis functions. The accepted
value for the Pd lattice constant is shown as a brown vertical line in the ﬁgure. As we might hope, this value lies very
close to the global minimum in the energy curves. The lattice constant for MgO as shown by the light green line in the
ﬁgure is larger than that of Pd, but not sufﬁciently large to drive the Pd into its ferromagnetic state when the sandwich
structure is epitaxially grown so that some fraction of the Pd is forced to take on the lattice constant of the underlying
MgO. Thus, if the LENR reaction were to depend upon the presence of a large magnetic ﬁeld, we would predict that the
sandwich structures made from MgO will not perform any better than those without any metal oxide layers at all – in
agreement with the experimental observations. On the other hand, the lattice constant of CaO (4.815 Å) is considerably
larger than that of MgO, as one can see in the light blue vertical line in the ﬁgure. In fact, the lattice constant of CaO is
sufﬁciently large that if we get some epitaxial growth of the Pd on top of the CaO so that the Pd is forced to assume the
CaO lattice constant, we expect the Pd to be driven well into its ferromagnetic state, regardless of whether the tensile
stress is applied in 3 or only 2 physical dimensions. This is also in excellent agreement with experiment.

Figure 10.False color cross-sectional image of absolute value of spin-up minus spin-down charge density after adding the single hydrogen atom.
The hydrogen is barely visible just below the central Ca atom and above the center-most Pd atom. Please note that the “eyes” of the central Ca atom
are now missing, and the brightness of the Pd atom immediately below the hydrogen and the oxygen directly above the hydrogen is smaller than the
other Pd and oxygen atoms, respectively.

As with any hypothesis, further experiments would be necessary either to conﬁrm or refute it. However, if conﬁr-
mation is obtained, the insight gained could illuminate the path toward technological exploitation. Among other things,
it could provide guidance for those seeking other metal insulating compounds with even larger lattice constants (such
as BaF2, for example, with a lattice constant near 6.2 Å). There is, of course, a maximum percentage lattice constant
mismatch between the two materials (typically only a few percent) that can be tolerated without negative effects such as
delamination of the epitaxial ﬁlm, nucleation of dislocations or other crystallographic defects, and thermal expansion
problems, to name just a few. Thus the quest for the optimum set of materials for any given application will be far from
trivial.


6. DFT Studies of the CaO:Pd and MgO:Pd Interfaces

The lattice structures for most of the elemental metals contain a basis with only one or at most two atoms. This makes
it possible to study such structures even when limited to a single core processor. However, the study of an interface
between two materials usually requires construction of a much larger system containing at least several tens of atoms.
Fortunately, the authors have access to a desktop Linux machine with 16 cores and 16 GB of RAM, establishing an
upper limit on the accessible systems at about 75 atoms. We therefore modeled the CaO:Pd interface by constructing
a supercell of 2 × 2 × 2 FCC unit cells, the bottom 4 of which are composed of Pd and the top 4 of CaO. The overall
lattice constant for the supercell was set at twice the value for a single cell of CaO. This should be reasonably accurate
in the limit as the CaO layer becomes much thicker than the Pd layer. Quantum Espresso saves both the many electron
wave function and the spin-polarized charge density as arrays deﬁned on a discretized three dimensional mesh. The
post-processing tool makes it straightforward to sample the wave function and charge density on any user-speciﬁed line

Figure 11.
False color cross-sectional image of total charge taken parallel to theYZ plane (along the [100] crystal plane)and intersecting the MgO:Pd
supercell. Individual atoms are labelled for clarity. The Mg atoms are not visible because they are represented in the pseudopotential ﬁle only by their
two valence electrons, which have been completely absorbed into the electronic band structure of the material and are no longer localized around the
ion core. The Mg labels show where the ion cores lie.

or plane intersecting the volume of the system under study. When combined with a full featured plotting program such
as Gnuplot, the user can generate false color images showing total charge density versus position, spin up minus spin
down charge density versus position, and many other useful parameters.

Figure 7 shows a false color cross-sectional image showing total charge density through the YZ ([100]) plane of the
supercell. Individual atoms are labeled to facilitate their species identiﬁcation. The atoms appear as doughnut-shaped
objects because the pseudopotential ﬁles used to represent each atom contain only the outermost valence electrons,
the ones most directly involved in the creation of chemical bonds and the determination of most physical properties of
materials. Figure 8 shows a false color cross-sectional image through exactly the same set of atoms, however here we
are plotting the absolute value of spin-up minus spin-down charge density as a function of position with a logarithmic
color scale in order to assess which atoms are the most ferromagnetically active. The largest and brightest atoms in
Fig. 8 are Pd, and the spin polarized image shows evidence of the four-fold symmetry of the FCC lattice. We thus
appreciate that the Pd has indeed become spin polarized by virtue of the tensile stress applied by the CaO lattice with
which the Pd is in contact.

The thin black regions surrounding each Pd atom represent places where the spin polarization goes through a zero
and switches algebraic sign. Since the straight line path from one Pd to another passes through exactly two of these
sign changes, we see that all the Pd are ordered ferromagnetically with respect to one another. The smaller of the bright
atoms are the oxygens, and we note that these are also spin polarized and ferromagnetically ordered relative to the Pd

Figure 12.False color cross-sectional image of absolute value of spin-up minus spin-down charge density taken parallel to the YZ plane (along the
[100] crystal plane) and intersecting the MgO:Pd supercell. The same logarithmic scale as presented in Figs. 8 and 10 was used to grade the colors.

The entire image is black, conﬁrming our prediction that the structure does not show any ferromagnetic ordering.
atoms. We also note that all the Pd atoms are equally magnetized. The shape of the spin polarized regions of the oxygen
atoms is somewhat reminiscent of “Fig. 8” shape of the p orbitals that serve as the outermost occupied orbitals for the
oxygen atoms. Finally, the least magnetically active of the three atomic species in Fig. 8 is the sublattice of calcium
atoms. These atoms can easily be distinguished from the other species by their faint resemblance to the face of a masked
and bearded burglar. The very low level of magnetic activity for the Ca atoms is consistent with our monatomic results
for calcium showing zero spin polarization for all of Columns I and II elements.

In order for the CaO:Pd layered structure to be technologically useful for performing transmutations, one must
permeate the structure with deuterium under a modest pressure differential. It is therefore of interest to seek some
insight into how the structure will change when the octahedral sites on the Pd layers are occupied by hydrogen atoms.
The minimum perturbation possible involves the addition of just one hydrogen atom, and the most aesthetically-
appealing place to add this atom is immediately above the center-most Pd atom. Figure 9 shows the total electron
density false color image of the CaO:Pd structure with the single added hydrogen, and Fig. 10 shows the corresponding
spin-polarized image.

Figures 7–10 are in good agreement with the prediction that the CaO:Pd structure can be expected to show itinerant
ferromagnetic ordering. Equally important, however, is the exploration of the MgO:Pd structure. If the results of
Fig. 6 are in fact correct, then we expect that a DFT study of the MgO:Pd structure with the supercell lattice constant set
to twice the equilibrium value for MgO (4.211 Å) should result in no observable ferromagnetic ordering. Figures 11
and 12 show the results of the MgO:Pd calculation. Figure 11 shows a false color image of the total electron density
vs. position in the YZ ([100]) plane at x = 0, and Fig. 12 shows an image of the spin-up minus spin-down charge

Figure 13.Ground state lattice energy (left vertical axis) in Rydbergs and absolute magnetization (right vertical axis) for cubic zirconia (ZrO2)
versus FCC lattice constant in Angstroms. The green squares show the ground state energy for the ferromagnetic solution, and the blue line shows
absolute magnetization in Bohr Magnetons per unit cell. The narrow black line is the regression parabola that was derived by ﬁtting the ﬁve points at
the bottom of the energy curve to a second order polynomial. The extracted value of lattice constant is 5.1082 Å versus an accepted value of 5.07 Å.

density for the structure. The scales used in Figs. 11 and 12 are identical to those in Figs. 7 and 8, respectively. Aside
from the “missing” valence electrons removed from the Mg atoms, the image shown in Fig. 11 closely resembles that
of Fig. 7. In fact, the most obvious difference between the two ﬁgures is that the atoms appear slightly larger in Fig.
11. This is entirely due to the fact that the lattice constant in the MgO:Pd structure is considerably smaller (2 × 4.211
versus 2 × 4.815Å) than the lattice constant in the CaO:Pd structure, as is evident from the X and Y axis scales.

Finally, we note that the image in Fig. 12 is entirely black because there is no spin polarization down to the level of
10−5 electrons per cubic Bohr radius in the MgO:Pd structure, thus conﬁrming our expectations that no spontaneous
magnetization will appear because the Pd has not been strained up to its threshold for spontaneous ferromagnetic
ordering. One dimensional cross sections were also performed for the same supercell runs (CaO:Pd with and without
the single added H atom and MgO:Pd) whose two dimensional spin polarization false color images are shown in Figs.
8, 10, and 12. In order to avoid undue increases in the length of the paper, their plots are presented in a Supplemental
Section contained on-line.


7. Application to the Arata Structure

Yoshiaki Arata of Osaka University has published a number of interesting papers in which he and his colleagues report
several experimental observations that may be relevant to the computational results presented in this work. ZrO2:Pd
structures were fabricated by alloying Pd and Zr and subsequently oxidizing the alloy. Since Zr has a much higher
chemical afﬁnity for oxygen than Pd does, we end up with Pd nanoparticles embedded in an insulating matrix of ZrO2

Figure 14.Simultaneous plots showing the ferromagnetic (green squares) and paramagnetic (small red squares) energy curve for Pd on the left
vertical axis, the magnetization of Pd on the right vertical axis when strained in two and three dimensions, and the equilibrium lattice constants for
Pd (brown), MgO (light green), CaO (light blue), and ZrO2 (red) – all versus lattice constant.

(which can crystallize as the well-known cubic zirconia). The main experimental observations can be summarized as
follows:

(1) Stimulation of the ZrO2:Pd powder with ultrasonic power greatly increased the LENR rate.

(2) Stimulation of the ZrO2:Pd powder with energy from a welding laser [10] greatly increased the LENR rate. In
his ICCF-10 paper, Arata et al. do not state what kind of welding laser they employed. However, a literature
search of Arata’s other papers [11] strongly suggests that the laser was likely to have been a CO2 laser. In fact,
Arata invented the CO2 laser welding process.

(3) LENR events, including the generation of signiﬁcant quantities of 4He, were observed when the ZrO2:Pd
powder was loaded with deuterium. No 4He was observed when the pure light isotope of hydrogen was used.

(4) No 4He was observed when the experiment was run with bulk Pd.

(5) The use of Pd black powder resulted in a low level of 4He. The use of Pd nanoparticles resulted in higher 4He
levels, but not nearly as much as when the ZrO2:Pd powder was used.

In light of the computational results presented in the previous sections of this work, we performed DFT studies of
the cubic zirconia lattice with results presented in Fig. 13.

The error between the extracted value of lattice constant and the accepted value is about 0.75%, thus the most basic
of the DFT results are in reasonable agreement with observation. The reader will note our DFT results predict that ZrO2
can become ferromagnetic if it is placed in sufﬁciently high tensile stress. However, we do not expect this to happen in
the Arata structure, because the ZrO2 is placed in contact with Pd, which has a smaller lattice constant, thereby placing
the zirconia in compressive stress. Having veriﬁed the lattice constant for FCC cubic zirconia, we next inquire how
this value compares with the threshold for the onset of spontaneous ferromagnetic ordering in Pd. Results are shown
in Fig. 14.


Figure 15.False color cross-sectional image of total charge taken parallel to the YZ plane (along the [100] crystal plane) and intersecting the
ZrO2:Pd supercell. Individual atoms are labeled for clarity. However, the oxygen atoms are not visible in this view because they occupy lattice sites
located above and below the plane being represented in the ﬁgure. The Pd atoms can be distinguished from the Zr because the Pd core hole is smaller
due to the higher nuclear charge. In addition, the Pd 4d valence charge cloud exhibits a slightly higher contrast around the circumference than the
Zr atoms.

As we can see from the ﬁgure, cubic zirconia has a lattice constant larger than any of the substrates used by the
MHI team. This suggests that growing Pd on a zirconia substrate will push the fraction of Pd cells that grow epitaxially
further into the ferromagnetic regime than using MgO or even CaO. Indeed, the ﬁgure suggests that if the LENR rate is
somehow driven by the local magnetic ﬁeld intensity, we may expect to see rates for the Arata structures that are higher
than those reported by the MHI team with their CaO substrates, provided only that the larger lattice constant of ZrO2
does not cause the fraction of Pd cells growing epitaxially to plummet.

Before leaving the subject of theArata results, we should comment on the use of the CO2 laser and draw a connection
with the work of Letts and Hagelstein. It is by now well-known that the output wavelength of a CO2 laser is about
10.7 µm. When this free space wavelength is converted to frequency, we get a value of about 28.04 THz, which does:
not agree very well with the A1g stretching mode frequencies of 88.9, 108.8, and 125.7 THz for the D2, HD, and H2
free-space molecules, respectively. However, once the molecules are added to a monovacancy within the Pd lattice and
the structure is relaxed to allow the hydrogen/deuterium atoms to ﬁnd locally minimum energy positions, we calculate
a number of phonon energy eigenvalues that lie in the 20–35 THz frequency range, depending upon which of several
minimum energy sites are occupied by the hydrogen/deuterium molecules. Thus it is not difﬁcult to believe that Arata
and his colleagues may have been pumping the hydrided or deuterided Pd lattice close to one of its resonances, as
indeed Letts and Hagelstein reported when they described three one-phonon resonances at 8, 15, and 20 THz in their

Figure 16.False color cross-sectional image of total charge density in a plane deﬁned by the [110] and Z axes and intersecting the ZrO2:Pd
supercell. The aspect ratio of this ﬁgure is higher than 1:1 because the length of the [110] face diagonal is
√ times larger than the length of the unit cell in the X, Y, or Z dimensions.

two-laser paper [2]. What is also interesting is that Arata reports very little LENR activity when bulk Pd or powdered
Pd was stimulated with the beam from the laser. Only when the Pd was in surface contact with a complex oxide did he
observe high LENR activity and signiﬁcant 4He production.


8. DFT Study of the ZrO2:Pd Interface

DFT studies of the ZrO2:Pd interface were performed using a 2 × 2 × 2 supercell in a manner similar to that described
in Section 6 for the purpose of studying ferromagnetic activity and identifying which atomic species are most active.
Figure 15 shows a false color image of the total charge density of the ZrO2:Pd supercell sampled on a plane parallel
to the YZ ([100]) plane and similar to those shown in Figs. 7, 9, and 11. The supercell lattice constant was set at
10.2164 Å, corresponding to a lattice constant of 5.1082 Å for each individual unit cell.:

This view shows that the Pd and Zr atoms occupy the usual sites in the FCC supercell structure. However, the
oxygen atoms are not visible in this view. In order to provide a view showing all 3 atomic species, we need to orient
the horizontal axis in the crystallographic [110] direction instead of purely parallel to the Y-axis. Such a view is shown
in Fig. 16.

As with the CaO:Pd and MgO:Pd structures, we generated spin-polarized images for the ZrO2:Pd supercell.
Figure 17 shows the spin-polarized image corresponding to the total charge image of Fig. 15, and Fig. 18 shows
the spin-polarized image corresponding to the total charge image of Fig. 16. There are a number of striking features
visible in Figs. 17 and 18. First, we note that the two rows of Pd atoms are no longer equally polarized; the Pd atoms
located closest to the oxygen atoms are polarized about 20 times more strongly than the Pd atoms located closest to the
Zr atoms. Likewise, the two rows of oxygen atoms shown in the ﬁgure are also no longer equivalent; the oxygen atoms

Figure 17.False color cross-sectional image of spin-up minus spin-down charge density taken parallel to the YZ plane (along the [100] crystal
plane) and intersecting the ZrO2:Pd supercell. The brightest features identify the lowest row of three Pd atoms, while the upper row of two Pd atoms
(shown in red) is not as strongly magnetized. The magnetically inactive zirconium atoms are shown largely in violet and black with just a trace of
red.

located closest to the Pd are much more strongly polarized than the ones near the Zr atoms. We also note that the Zr
atoms themselves are very weakly polarized. This latter observation should not be especially surprising, because the
lattice constant for the individual unit cells in this run was set to 5.1082 Å, corresponding to the minimum in the ZrO2
energy curve. This is considerably less than the computed threshold of about 7 Å for the onset of spin polarization
of the Zr atoms. Finally, both ﬁgures reveal exactly two zero crossings in traveling between any two Pd atoms and
between any Pd and one of the neighboring strongly polarized oxygen atoms. Thus all of the Pd are ferromagnetically
ordered, and furthermore, the oxygens are ferromagnetically polarized with respect to the Pd atoms, a situation very
different from what is shown in Fig. 10, where the single hydrogen electron spin is polarized antiferromagnetically
with respect to the Pd. One dimensional cross sections were also performed for the same ZrO2:Pd supercell run whose
two dimensional spin polarization false color images are shown in Figs. 17 and 18. In order to avoid undue increases
in the length of the paper, their plots are presented in the on-line Supplemental Section.

The three structures discussed in this work may also be compared by providing their respective total supercell
magnetic polarizations. For the MgO:Pd structure, the total magnetization is obviously zero, because there were no
species whose interatomic separation was pushed beyond the threshold for spontaneous magnetization. For the CaO:Pd
supercell, the total absolute magnetization was 5.57 Bohr magnetons, while for the ZrO2:Pd supercell, the value was
8.61 Bohr magnetons. In both of the latter structures, the only atoms to become polarized are the Pd and the oxygens.:
The CaO:Pd supercell contains a total of 32 Pd and oxygen atoms, while the ZrO2:Pd supercell contains a total of
48. Thus the ratio of polarized atoms between the two structures is 48/32 = 1.50. As it turns out, the ratio of the

Figure 18.False color cross-sectional image of spin-up minus spin-down charge density in a plane deﬁned by the [110] and Z axes and intersecting
the ZrO2:Pd supercell. The bright heart-shaped features identify the highly magnetized rows of Pd atoms, while the smaller bright features are the
rows of oxygen atoms located near the highly magnetized Pd atoms. The less highly magnetized oxygen atoms are shown in red below their more
highly magnetized counterparts. Once again, the magnetically inactive zirconium atoms are shown largely in violet and black. Finally, the less highly
magnetized Pd atoms are not visible in this cross-sectional view.

two magnetizations was 8.61/5.57 = 1.54. It is thus tempting to attribute the magnetization difference simply to the
difference in the number of polarized atoms. However, the local variations in spin polarization shown in the ﬁgures
suggest that this is an oversimpliﬁed picture, because all of the Pd and oxygen atoms in the CaO:Pd supercell are
strongly polarized, while this is clearly not true for either the Pd or the oxygen atoms in the ZrO2:Pd supercell. A
more accurate picture can be obtained by making one dimensional plots of spin polarization through each of the two
supercells and plotting the results on a linear scale instead of the logarithmic scale used in the false color images. Such
a plot is shown in Fig. 19.

Care must be exercised in running one dimensional cross sections through the atoms, however, because the lattice
symmetry induces nodes in the spin polarization along certain directions. In order to avoid sampling the spin polariza-
tions along nodal lines, it was necessary to section the CaO:Pd supercell in the [001] direction (Z-direction) along a
vector passing through the origin of coordinates. Thus the red line in the plot passes through Pd atoms at the 0.2 and
1.2 values of the Z-coordinate. The pair of minor peaks near 1.0 on the X-axis correspond to one of the oxygen atoms.:
For the ZrO2:Pd supercell, it was necessary to perform our section in the [110] direction at an altitude of Z = 0 in order
to pass through the antinodes in the spin polarization for the Pd atoms, and each pair of tall, green peaks represents
one Pd atom. Even after exercising care to ensure our sections pass through the antinodes of the atomic polarization
patterns, it is clear that the peak spin polarization is about two times larger for the ZrO2:Pd structure than it is for the
CaO:Pd. This is most probably attributable to the fact that the larger ZrO2:Pd lattice constant pushes the Pd further up
the magnetization curve than the CaO:Pd structure does.

Figure 19.Plots of spin polarization (in units of electronic charges per cubic Bohr radius) versus position in the CaO:Pd supercell (red solid line)
and in the ZrO2:Pd supercell (green dotted line). The horizontal coordinates for the ZrO2:Pd plot were divided by
√2 to permit display on the same axis scale. The tall peaks in each of the plots represent the Pd atoms.


9. Summary

In summary, spin-polarized DFT computations have been useful in providing insight into the magnetic behavior of
many of the transition metals on the Periodic Table in their elemental lattices. Most of the transition metals and a
number of sp elements (including diamond, aluminum, silicon, germanium, selenium, tellurium, lead, and polonium)
are predicted to exhibit ferromagnetic ordering when their lattices are placed in sufﬁciently high tensile stress. At
the threshold lattice constant for the onset of this ferromagnetic ordering, we predict that the energy surface for the
elemental lattice bifurcates into two stable solutions, one paramagnetic with a higher energy and one ferromagnetic with
a lower energy. The paramagnetic sheet for the energy surface above threshold joins smoothly with the paramagnetic
sheet below threshold, however the ferromagnetic sheet joins with the paramagnetic sheet in such a way that the
energy is continuous, but its derivatives may exhibit jump discontinuities at the threshold. Most of the elements exhibit
magnetization curves that rise very rapidly with lattice constant above threshold and then saturate at higher values,
approaching well-deﬁned asymptotes as the lattice constant grows. In most cases, the normalized values of these
asymptotic magnetizations lie close to 1.0 Bohr Magneton per unpaired p or d electron spin, which is the expected
limiting case for isolated atoms. Interestingly, we ﬁnd that (with the possible exceptions of the Lanthanide andActinide
series) the atoms whose outermost electron shells contain only s electrons do not exhibit ferromagnetic ordering at any
practical value of lattice constant. This speciﬁcally includes all the Columns I and II elements and several elements on
the right-hand edge of the Transition Metal Group such as zinc, cadmium, silver, and gold.

The results summarized above may now be applied to a variety of multilayer structures whose LENR results
have been published during the past 15 years. The Mitsubishi Heavy Industries (MHI) team under Yasuhiro Iwamura
reported successful observation of several different types of nuclear transmutations when using a structure consisting
of alternating layers of CaO and Pd, both of which crystallize in the face-centered cubic (FCC) structure. The CaO
unit cell lattice constant is about 4.815 Å, placing it above the threshold for the onset of spontaneous ferromagnetic
ordering of Pd (4.50 Å when tensile stress is applied in all three dimensions, 4.69 Å when stress is applied in only
two dimensions). By contrast, they reported negative experimental results when MgO was substituted for the CaO.
The lattice constant for MgO is only 4.211 Å, placing it well below the thresholds for magnetization in Pd. Similarly,
the Osaka University team under Yoshiaki Arata reported high LENR rates and 4He production rates when their Pd
nanoparticles were grown in intimate contact with ZrO2, which also has an FCC lattice and a lattice constant of about
5.07 Å. They reported much lower LENR rates when bulk Pd or even ﬁnely divided Pd powder was used in the same:
experimental apparatus.

The search to identify the experimental parameters that most directly control LENR phenomena has posed and
continues to pose difﬁcult challenges for the community. The effect of magnetic ﬁelds upon measured LENR rates has
been known for some time but is not yet well understood. Our results suggest the possible existence of an underlying
order involving spontaneous magnetization that may tie together the work of several different teams and materials
systems. It is hoped that these results will provide a number of mechanistic clues for the theoretical community as well
as guidance for LENR materials specialists seeking to optimize reactor structures for various LENR applications of the
future.


REFERENCES

[1] J.O.M. Bockris, R. Sundaresan, Z, Minevski and D. Letts, Triggering of heat and sub-surface changes in Pd–D systems, ICCF
Conference Proceedings, Vol. 4, 1993.
[2] D. Letts and P.L. Hagelstein, Stimulation of optical phonons in deuterated palladium, ICCF Conference Proceedings, Vol. 14,
[3] Y. Iwamura, T. Itoh, M. Sakano, N. Yamazaki, S. Kuribayashi, Y. Terada, T. Ishikawa and J. Kasagi, Observation of nuclear
transmutation reactions induced by D2 gas permeation through Pd complexes, ICCF Conference Proceedings, Vol. 11, 2004.
[4] Y. Arata and Y.C. Zhang, Development of compact nuclear fusion reactor using solid pycnodeuterium as nuclear fuel, ICCF
Conference Proceedings, Vol. 10, 2002.
[5] P. Hohenberg and W. Kohn, Inhomogeneous electron gas, Phys. Rev. 136 (1964) B864–B871.
[6] W. Kohn and L.J. Sham, Self-consistent equations including exchange and correlation effects, Phys. Rev. 140 (1965) A1133–
A1138.
[7] P. Giannozzi, S. Baroni, N. Bonini, M. Calandra, R. Car, C. Cavazzoni, D. Ceresoli, G.L. Chiarotti, M. Cococcioni, I. Dabo„ A.
Dal Corso, S. de Gironcoli, S. Fabris, G. Fratesi, R. Gebauer, U. Gerstmann, C. Gougoussis, A. Kokalj, M. Lazzeri, L. Martin-
Samos, N. Marzari, F. Mauri, R. Mazzarello, S. Paolini, A. Pasquarello, L. Paulatto, C. Sbraccia, S. Scandolo, G. Sclauzero,
A.P. Seitsonen, A. Smogunov, P. Umari and R.M. Wentzcovitch, J. Phys.: Condensed Matter 21 (2009) 395502.
[8] R.W.G. Wyckoff, Crystal Structures, Wiley, New York, 1963.
[9] T. Hioki, N. Takahashi, S. Kosaka, T. Nishi, H. Azuma, S. Hibi, Y. Higuchi, A. Murase and T. Motohiro, Inductively coupled
plasma mass spectrometry study on the increase in the amount of Pr atoms for Cs–Ion–implanted Pd/CaO multilayer complex
with deuterium permeation, Jap. J. Appl. Phys. 52 (2013) 107301-1–107301-8.
[10] Y. Arata and Y.C. Zhang, Development of compact nuclear fusion reactor using solid pycnodeuterium as nuclear fuel, ICCF
Conference Proceedings, Vol. 10, 2003.
[11] See, for example, Y. Arata, N. Abe and T. Oda, Fundamental phenomena in high power CO2 laser welding (Report I):
atmospheric laser welding (welding physics, process & instrument), Trans. JWRI 14(1) (1985) 5–11.

Appendix A

Appendix B

Figure 20.
Appendix B: Periodic Table of the elements.

Supplementary Figures

Table 1.
Appendix A: Table of computed and accepted values of lattice constant

Figure 21.
Supplementary Figure S1.

Figure 22.
Supplementary Figure S2.

Figure 23.
Supplementary Figure S3.

Figure 24.
Supplementary Figure S4.
