1. Introduction

There has been considerable theoretical eﬀort on the problem of anomalies in metal
deuterides.a There exist some dated reviews of theoretical work,1,2 but there has
been no attempt in recent years to review work in this area generally. There is
general agreement within the community that the excess heat eﬀect is real, and
that nuclear emissions occur.
The evidence for 4He production correlated with
excess heat is compelling, and suggests that whatever is going on is consistent with
an underlying d+d → 4He reaction mechanism. Neither experiment nor theory has
so far clariﬁed how any of this works to the satisfaction of the community.

Recent theoretical work can be divided immediately into eﬀorts that focus on
reaction mechanisms consistent with d+d → 4He, and other reaction mechanisms.
With respect to the latter, Fisher has proposed reactions that involve polyneutrons,3
and Kozima has written about neutron bands and neutron “drops”.4 With respect
aFor example, on the order of 70 abstracts on theoretical work were submitted for ICCF4.
Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on Cold Fusion, Cambridge, MA (2003) c⃝World Scientiﬁc
to the former, there are several diﬀerent approaches currently being pursued that
involve deuteron-deuteron reactions in some way. The possibility that the Coulomb
interaction can be suppressed is being pursued by two eﬀorts: Kim and coworkers5
have written that quantum many-body eﬀects may accomplish this; and S. R. Chubb
and T. A. Chubb have argued that ion band state eﬀects can lead to an eﬀective re-
duction of the Coulomb interaction.6,? Li and coworkers have studied the possibility
that resonant tunneling eﬀects can account for some of the anomalies.8 Hundreds of
other works have been put forth that we have not mentioned in this brief discussion.

Most of the theoretical ideas put forth, including those cited above, have not
been generally accepted as an explanation for the anomalies, and have not been
pursued by other groups.b There are two approaches which have attracted some
wider interest: these include the ideas of Takahashi, and of Preparata. Takahashi
has written most recently about a proposed multi-deuteron resonant fusion scheme,
in which three or more deuterons tunnel together in the metal deuteride.9

The general approach of Preparata is most closely related to the approach we
have taken as discussed in this paper. Very much simpliﬁed, Preparata proposes that
two deuterons make an electromagnetic transition to an intermediate nuclear state,
and a second electromagnetic transition to the helium ground state.10 The transi-
tions in this three-state model are collective in the same sense as those described in
our work. The electromagnetic interaction is coupled to electronic plasma modes
in Preparata’s approach. Preparata’s ideas have attracted interest and support,11
and remains an area of active research12,13 following his loss before ICCF8.14

Our earliest eﬀorts at developing models capable of predicting the fast reaction
rates associated with the experimental claims were not particularly successful. After
numerous failed attempts and many disappointments, we decided to focus instead
on physical mechanisms, in the hope that understanding would emerge from a more
fundamental point of view. A clear identiﬁcation of the physical mechanisms in-
volved might lead to incremental advances of connecting one piece of the puzzle at a
time between theory and experiment. In the middle 1990s, this approach began to
have the ﬁrst minor successes in making connections between physical statements
and experimentally observed eﬀects.
Incremental advances since that time have
moved the models forward to their present form, where there now seem to be many
connections to diverse experiments and eﬀects. We believe that further eﬀort along
these lines will ultimately provide for a satisfactory theoretical understanding of
the phenomena in general. In the sections that follow, we have made an attempt to
give a systematic account of the diﬀerent aspects of the models under development.

The starting place for our modeling at present is a pretty solid foundation that
proposes that a description of nuclear processes in a metal deuteride should proba-
bly include the solid state environment at the outset in the formulation. Standard
models from nuclear based on the application of vacuum physics models to metal
deuterides will be successful in describing processes in which the solid state sys-
tem interacts minimally. These do not include the new eﬀects (low-level dd-fusion,
energetic products not due to dd-fusion, heat and helium production, tritium pro-
duction, and other anomalies), which from our perspective are a consequence of
including the solid state in a fundamental way in the problem.

Although this manuscript is overly long for an ICCF proceedings paper, we are
able to review only brieﬂy a subset of the issues. Under such conditions, there is no
possibility of adequately addressing issues properly. Consequently, we have made
an attempt to isolate the main conjectures which have allowed us to make progress
on the problem, and to spell them out simply and clearly. In this way, attention
might be focused on the more important arguments and aspects of the models.


2. Maximization of the Deuteron-Deuteron Overlap

Certain speciﬁc aspects of diﬀerent experimental results suggest that reactions in-
volving two deuterons in the metal lattice occur. Examples of these include: (a)
the reported observations of 4He in proportion to the excess energy, with a reaction
Q value of 24 MeV, consistent with a d+d →4He mechanism; (b) observations of
dd-fusion reaction products at low levels and (c) observations of anomalies in metal
deuterides with the absence of similar eﬀects in metal hydrides. Consequently, we
should be interested in the conditions under which two deuterons might come into
close proximity so that they might react. This leads us to our ﬁrst conjecture:
Conjecture I:
The probability that two deuterons will interact is maximized in the case
of states involving double site occupancy of deuterium in a metal deu-
teride. Increasing the occupation of such states increases the reaction
rate or the probability of reactions occuring.

2.1. Maximization of the Overlap:
The argument in support of this conjecture can be presented in terms of an idealized
model described by the Hamiltonian
This Hamiltonian describes two deuterons that are conﬁned within a potential that
extends over neighboring octahedral sites in a metal deuteride. Consider the ground
state solution for the associated time-independent Schr¨odinger equation
An approximate solution can be developed of the form
where the φ functions are single deuteron wavefunctions and the Ri are the equi-
librium positions in the octahedral sites. The separation function g(r2 − r1) serves
to keep the deuterons apart when they are in the same site.

The overlap probability in the special case that the two deuterons are assumed
to be centered at neighboring sites in this approximation is
Pij(r) = Vnuc |φ(r − Ri)|2|φ(r − Rj)|2g2(0)
where Vnuc is a nuclear volume. The overlap probability when the two deuterons
are at the same site is
Pii(r) = Vnuc |φ(r − Ri)|2|φ(r − Ri)|2g2(0)
The same-site overlap probability is maximized when the deuterons are both at the
equilibrium position
Pii(Ri) = Vnuc |φ(0)|2|φ(0)|2g2(0)
To see how big the site-other-site overlap can be, we take the ratio of Pij(r) and
the same site overlap at the equilibrium position
Pij(r)
Pii(Ri) = |φ(r − Ri)|2
|φ(0)|2
|φ(r − Rj)|2
|φ(0)|2
If we compute the ratio at a point r half-way between the two equilibrium sites,
we ﬁnd that a very small ratio is recovered, as the probability for tunneling to the
half-way point is very small. A computation of the overlap probability near one of
the equilibrium points is also very small, as one of the deuterons must tunnel all the
way from one equilibrium point to the other. We conclude from this argument that
two deuterons have the best chance of interacting if they occupy the same site.


2.2. Connection with Experiment:
There are a variety of rather practical consequences that follow from this ﬁrst con-
jecture. In no experiment has it been established directly that double occupancy
states are occupied signiﬁcantly, and hence there is no direct experimental connec-
tion between the occupation of such states and the occurrence of anomalies. But
there is considerable indirect evidence, some of which we enumerate as follows:
(1) In Fleischmann-Pons experiments performed at SRI and elsewhere in the early
1990s, there appeared a correlation between the occurence of excess heat and high
loading.15 This is consistent with a requirement for deuterium in states of double
occupancy, and we propose this as a more fundamental version of the requirement.
(2) It has been noted by several experimentalists that the excess heat eﬀect is im-
proved with increasing operating temperature.e Storms reported a measurement
of the strong dependence of excess heat on temperature in a Fleischmann-Pon ex-
periment, reporting it in terms of an activation energy through a statistical factor
(e−E/kT), with E serving as a chemical activation energy.17 The energy is this
measurement was about 670 meV. We propose that this temperature dependence
is due in part to excitation to states of double deuterium occupation, with most
of the 670 meV being associated with this particular kind of promotion.
(3) The activation energy for double occupancy is reduced in the presence of a single
most metal atom vacancy. Metal lattices that are highly defective in this regard
would be expected to be superior. This may be consistent with observations in the
case of codeposition experiments and with the results of Case. Case recently gave
results for his highly defective Pd catalyst on carbon, noting that the excess heat
appeared to increase with temperature (from 185 C to 205 C) with an associated
activation energy of 13 kcal/mol, which is about 560 meV.18
(4) Little in the models under discussion in this manuscript suggest that PdD is unique
in the properties required for excess heat or other anomalies. Instead, it is the abil-
ity to load Pd very highly using electrochemistry near room temperature to achieve
a high deuterium chemical potential that is more relevant in the Fleischmann-Pons
experiment. Excess heat and other anomalies have been reported in a variety of
other metal deuterides. In the Case experiment, the loading is not particularly
high, yet there seems to be good evidence that excess heat is produced.


3. Site-other-site Reactions

Nuclear physics as currently understood in the mainstream literature and in text-
books does not provide a physical basis for the anomalies, as has been noted many
times since 1989. Consequently, there must be new physical processes involved.
Experimental results in which heat, or fusion products at low level, are observed
are indicative that new physics is going on; but, in our view does not provide much
insight as to precisely what physical mechanisms are involved. For this, we turn
to experiments in which low-level nuclear products are seen that are not consistent
with dd-fusion.

In some experiments involving metal deuterides, fast alpha particles have been
seen in relatively small amounts. In the case of PdD, alphas have been observedf
between 11 and 16 MeV.19 In the case of TiD, alphas and protons have been observed
near 14 MeV.20 We proposed previously that alpha emission above 10 MeV might
occur based on a new kind of site-other-site reaction process, in which the energy
from a reaction at one site is coupled to a reaction at another site.22 We previously
conjectured that site-other-site reactions of the form23,24,25
(d + d)a + (APd)b −→ (4He)a + (A−4Ru +4 He)b
are involved in the production of fast alphas in the case of the PdD experiments.

Below, we propose a modiﬁcation of this kind of reaction, to be more consistent with
the nuclear physics literature. Nevertheless, this leads us to our second conjecture:
Conjecture II:
It is possible for nuclear reactions at two sites to be coupled together as
a second-order (or part of a higher-order) quantum process.

For this to be so, reactions at each site individually must exchange a quantum with
some quantum system that has a coherence length which encompasses both sites.
In the course of our investigations, we examined for this photon exchange, phonon
exchange and interactions with plasmons. In the end, it seemed to be clear that
phonon exchange would produce the largest eﬀect of this sort, as phonon exchange
in nuclear reactions would be mediated by the strong force, and hence be much
stronger than processes involving photon exchange.

3.1. Lattice Resonating Group Method:
Phonon exchange is usually not included in nuclear physics calculations of fusion
processes. Our intuition about how nuclear reactions occur is based on a vacuum
description, which was developed around 1930 and used successfully for nuclear
physics work ever since. In this picture, a fast deuteron approaching a stationary
deuteron in a metal deuteride might with some small probability tunnel to the sta-
tionary deuteron, approaching it on the fermi scale. If the two deuterons approach
close enough to touch on the nuclear scale, then nuclear rearrangement can occur,
and the exothermic nuclear products p+3H or n+3He leave about as fast as the laws
of physics allows. Processes mediated by the strong force are no longer possible once
the product nuclei are separated by about 10 fm, which occurs on a time scale on
the order of 10−21 seconds. There is no time to communicate that a reaction has
happened with neighbors on the atomic scale before the reaction is over and done.
Hence the reaction physics should be well described by a vacuum description. De-
tailed computations done using the resonating group method or R-matrix method,
both vacuum models, give good agreement with experimental results.

Both the resonating group method and R-matrix method can be generalized to
include phonon exchange with little diﬃculty, at least formally. In the case of the
resonating group method,26 we might write the variational wavefunction Ψt in the
form
where the Φj keep track of the nuclear structure of the reactants, and the chan-
nel separation factors Fj describe the relative coordinates of the reactants. The
optimization of the channel separation factors is accomplished through
The generalization of the resonating group method24 can be accomplished by as-
suming a diﬀerent variational wavefunction Ψt
where the Ψj are lattice channel separation factors, which keep track of the sep-
aration of the reactants as well as the position of the other quantum particles in
the relevant local environment. The optimization of the lattice channel separation
factors is accomplished analogously
With this generalization, we have an improved formulation that now includes
phonon exchange, and contains earlier vacuum descriptions as a limit or subset.
The new physics is compatible with earlier work in nuclear physics. This leads us
to our third conjecture
Conjecture III:
The anomalies in metal deuterides can be accounted for theoretically
within a formulation that generalizes the vacuum models to include the
local solid state environment. No other new basic physics is required
beyond what is in the textbooks, at least in principle.

Figure 1.
Schematic of an idealized second-order two-site reaction for the experiment of Lipson
et al. Site-other-site coupling leads to the formation of a Bohr excited nuclear state in Pd, which
decays through a multitude of channels (some of which are indicated).

There have been a wide variety of novel physical mechanisms proposed, including
the possibility that quantum mechanics will need to be replaced, to account for
the new experiments. In this conjecture, a belief is being expressed that only a
single very plausible new piece of physics needs to be added to the large body of
established physical law to make progress on this class of problem. In our work we
have had much success proceeding in this way, but at this point we have no proof
that this is so.

3.2. Connection with Experiment:
Although the second-order site-other-site reaction mechanism under discussion is
new, we would expect the alpha ejection part of the process to be something like
photon-induced alpha emission, at least in the limit that a small number of phonons
are exchanged. This latter process has been studied in the nuclear physics literature
over the years, and at present is reasonably well understood. Photoalpha emission
occurs primarily through a process in which an excited nucleus is formed, from which
alphas and other particles evaporate.27 There does exist a direct mechanism,28 as we
assumed in our earlier discussions, but this is at most a minor fraction of the total
process. Photoalpha emission itself is only a small part of the total photoabsorption
process.
Most of the alpha particles within the statistical model are ejected at
energies well below the maximum energy associated with a ground state to ground
state direct process. Consequently, the signature of alpha ejection in the case of
metal deuterides should instead be a broad distribution centered at energies below
the maximum energy.29 The resulting site-other-site mechanism is illustrated in
Figure 1.

Figure 2.
Spectrum for alpha emission estimate from a naive version of the Weisskopf-Ewing
approximation.

(1) The observation of alphas in PdD in the range of 11-16 MeV of Lipson et al.19
appears to be consistent with this kind of mechanism.
We have estimated the
alpha spectrum (see Figure 2) for this kind of mechanism from a naive version of
the Weisskopf-Ewing model27 based on
I(E) ∼ e−2G(E) E e(aϵ)1/2
with ϵ = ∆E − Iα − E. This spectrum is a bit higher in energy than the experi-
mental results. Note that a signiﬁcant energetic proton signal would be expected
below 14 MeV.
(2) The alpha and proton signals seen in TiD by Lipson et al.20 is similarly consistent
with the mechanism under discussion. The maximum proton and alpha energies for
the diﬀerent titanium isotopes is shown in Figure 3. We note that the alpha yield
from photoﬁssion is larger in Ti than in Pd, which leads one to wonder whether
the associated alpha signals in TiD through this mechanism would be larger than
in PdD if all other things were equal.
(3) We note the measurements of energetic low mass charged ions from TiD by Ce-
cil’s group from the early 1990s, which is generally consistent with this kind of
mechanism.30
(4) This kind of site-other-site disintegration mechanism should produce primarily
neutrons and protons, with alphas, deuterons and tritons as having a lower in-
tegrated emission probability. Gammas would be present in connection with the
stabilization of the daughter nuclei. In the case of neutron emission from a Bohr
excited metal nucleus, a roughly exponential spectrum would be expected at low
energy31 (with a smaller contribution from the direct process). There exists at
least one report of a roughly exponential neutron emission from TiD.32
It would be very interesting in future experiments to determine whether all of
the expected particles and gammas are present in association with alpha emission, and to see whether the associated spectra can be compared with 24 MeV
photodisintegration spectra.

Figure 3.
Maximum proton and alpha ejection energies assuming ∆E = 23.85 MeV.

3.3. Not a Second-Order Process:
It is not diﬃcult to develop a model for site-other-site coupling as a second-order
process, such as outlined in previous work.24 The computation is illuminating for
two reasons. The ﬁrst is that the resulting reaction rate is lower than experiment
by tens of orders of magnitude, which leads immediately to the conclusion that this
eﬀect is not a simple second-order quantum process (present thinking is that it is a
decay channel for the null reaction process discussed below). The second is that the
computation illustrates clearly issues associated with localization. For models with
thermal excitation, the oﬀ-resonant phonon ﬁeld is localized, and there can be no
eﬀect. For a single highly-excited phonon mode with single phonon exchange at both
sites, the eﬀect is again local. However, for a single highly-excited phonon mode
with nonlinear coupling at both sites, the second-order eﬀect would be nonlocal.
This is interesting, and it provides a foundation for nonlocality in the case of the
null reactions.


4. Phonon Coupling

In the previous section, we described a formulation in which phonon interactions
might be included at the outset in a fusion calculation. The resulting formulation
is written in terms of lattice channel separation factors, which are much more com-
plicated than the channel separation factors of the vacuum version of the problem.
We have introduced a simplifying picture which allows for progress to be made on
detailed calculations with the new model.

The basic issue is that the solid state quantum system has a large number of
degrees of freedom, and it is prohibitive to attempt a computation in which an
attempt is made to keep track of all of them. Hence we seek simpler models that
contain the eﬀects under discussion, but which neglect everything not essential. In
this case, we propose an idealized model of the lattice in which a single phonon
mode is highly excited, and all other phonon modes are excited thermally.33 In the
case of an individual lattice separation factor, this simplifying picture would allow
us to work with approximate lattice channel separation factors of the form
Ψj −→ Fj φn
where φn is a simple harmonic oscillator eigenfunction describing n phonons in the
highly-excited mode. All other modes are presumed thermal, and we suppress them
in the notation.

There are numerous consequences of this, some of which will be touched on
below. This leads us to yet another conjecture:
Conjecture IV:
Anomalies in metal deuterides are stimulated by strong phonon excita-
tion.

The basic idea is that without strong phonon excitation, site-other-site interactions
are suppressed, and the new processes under discussion do not occur. The issues of
which phonon modes need to be excited, and by how much, remain to be addressed.

4.1. Mechanism:
There are diﬀerent approaches to the problem of phonon exchange mechanism. We
recognize at least two diﬀerent basic mechanisms. On the one hand, the positions
of the center of mass of the diﬀerent nuclei are phonon operators, and the strong
force between nuclei can be thought of as a nonlinear interaction of very high order.
On the other hand, if a reaction occurs then the phonon modes themselves may be
diﬀerent in the initial state reaction channel than in the ﬁnal state reaction channel.
An early description of this eﬀect in the case of electronic transitions in molecules
was given by Duschinsky.34 There is no reason in principle why both mechanisms
cannot play a role at the same time.

The two mechanisms lead to qualitatively diﬀerent kinds of results in the analysis
of anomalies in metal deuterides. The Duschinsky mechanism is far selective in what
speciﬁc reactions are favored, and leads to perhaps a simpler picture overall. At
present, our focus is on the Duschinsky mechanism.

Given a focus on Duschinsky coupling, the question that follows is what are
the ramiﬁcations in the phonon-nuclear coupling problem. In molecular physics, a
change in the phonon mode structure can result either from a change in the force
constants or a change in the masses. From our perspective, if two deuterons are
localized within fermis, then to the lattice they will look like a helium nucleus, in
terms of both force constants and masses.g
On the other hand, transitions that
result in a free neutron behave very diﬀerently, since the neutron is invisible to the
lattice. For these transitions, a Duschinsky eﬀect can be present since there is a
mass change from the point of view of the lattice.

4.2. Hybrid Description of Position Operators:
We have noted previously that there are diﬃculties inherent in the calculation
of phonon-nuclear interactions since the nuclear interactions are localized and the
phonon excitation is not. A description based on the nuclear center of mass coordi-
nates ˆRj is convenient for describing local interactions, but is highly inconvenient
for describing a highly excited phonon mode. A description based on a decomposi-
tion into phonon operators ˆqm
is convenient for describing the highly excited phonon mode, but is highly incon-
venient for describing local nuclear interactions.
To resolve this issue, we have
previously proposed a hybrid description of the form35
ˆRj = uj ˆq + ˆRj
which isolates explicitly the contribution of the highly excited phonon mode uj ˆq,
and combines the contributions from all the other phonon modes into a residual
position operator ˆRj.

4.3. Phonon Interaction Matrix Element:
The discussion above allows us to begin estimating the phonon interaction ma-
trix element. It is perhaps convenient here to examine the construction under the
simplifying assumption of a scalar Gaussian nuclear model (with distinguishable
nucleons), since this construction makes clear how the coupling works in this ap-
proach and allows for some initial quantitative estimates. We consider the speciﬁc
example of phonon exchange in the case of a transition between the 4He ground
state and an n+3He state.h We may write in the case of a particular interaction
potential
V nn′(r) = ⟨ Φ[n +3 He] φn | ˆH − E | Φ[4He] φn′ ⟩

We can think of this as a phonon matrix element in the sense
⟨ Φ[n +3 He] φn | ˆH − E | Φ[4He] φn′ ⟩ = ⟨φn| ˆΥ(r, ˆq)|φn′⟩
where
ˆΥ(r, q) = ⟨ Φ[n +3 He] | ˆH − E | Φ[4He] ⟩
where the integration is over the internal coordinates of the 3He nucleus. Assuming
a scalar Gaussian nuclear model,i we can take for the 4He nucleus a wavefunction
of the form
Φ[4He] = N4 e−β4|r1−r2|2
e−β4|r1−r3|2
e−β4|r1−r4|2
e−β4|r2−r3|2
e−β4|r2−r4|2
e−β4|r3−r4|2
where N4 is a normalization constant. For the n+3He channel we take
Φ[n +3 He] = N3 e−β3|r1−r2|2 e−β3|r1−r3|2 e−β3|r2−r3|2
since there is no internal nuclear structure in this model associated with the neutron.
We take for the interaction
ˆH − E −→ V0 [ e−α|r1−r4|2 + e−α|r2−r4|2 + e−α|r3−r4|2 ]
where we assume a scalar Gaussian nuclear force of strength V0.

4.4. Evaluation of the Interaction:
Our interest in this model is in how the phonon interaction appears in the problem.
The center of mass of the 4He and 3He nuclei (which are phonon position operators
in the initial state and ﬁnal states, respectively) are located at
ˆR[4He] = 1
4[r1 + r2 + r3 + r4]
ˆR[3He] = 1
3[r1 + r2 + r3]
The relative coordinates associated with the 3He nucleus are
x1 = r1 − ˆR[3He]
x2 = r2 − ˆR[3He]
x3 = r3 − ˆR[3He]
Since x1 + x2 + x3 = 0, the integral of Equation (19) is over two of these coordi-
nates. The coordinate r4 can be expressed in terms of the diﬀerent center of mass
coordinates according to
r4 = 4 ˆR[4He] − r1 − r2 − r3 = 4 ˆR[4He] − 3 ˆR[3He]
The lattice channel separation factor is a function of the distance between the
neutron and 3He nucleus, which is a phonon operator
ˆr = r4 − ˆR[3He] = 4
 
ˆR[4He] − ˆR[3He]
 
= ˆr + ∆u ˆq
We see a dependence of the phonon interaction in this problem on the relative
position operator ˆR[4He] − ˆR[3He], which will be nontrivial in this case since the
transition involves a Duschinsky modiﬁcation of the phonon mode structure due
to a mass change. This was not present in the dd to 4He matrix element that we
considered before.25 The ˆΥ operator can then be written in the form
ˆΥ(r, ˆq) = V0N3N4
 
dx1
 
dx2 e−β3|x1−x2|2e−β3|x1−x3|2e−β3|x2−x3|2
 
e−α|r+∆uˆq−x1|2 + e−α|r+∆uˆq−x2|2 + e−α|r+∆uˆq−x3|2 
e−β4|x1−x2|2e−β4|x1−x3|2e−β4|x2−x3|2e−β4|r+∆uˆq−x1|2e−β4|r+∆uˆq−x2|2e−β4|r+∆uˆq−x3|2
where x3 = −x1 − x2. The remaining computation for the scalar Gaussian model
is straightforward. We see in the discussion above that the coupling between the
nuclei and phonons appears in a natural way within the new formulation. Phonon
exchange can introduce angular momentum on the microscopic scale, and result in
a modiﬁcation of the selection rules. Part of our research eﬀort is currently aimed
at upgrading the phonon coupling model to take advantage of more realistic nuclear
wavefunctions and force models.37

4.5. Connection with Experiment:
(1) Phonon exchange leads to the posibility of angular momentum exchange, which
implies an ability to modify the microscopic angular momentum selection rules
from the vacuum case.
This lies at the heart of the possibility of d+d→4He
transitions without gamma emission, as part of site-other-site fast alpha emission,
or in connection with excess heat production.
(2) There is at present no experimental result which demonstrates this mechanism
cleanly in isolation.
It may be possible to develop such an experiment.
One
possibility is low energy d+d reactions in a metal deuteride with a highly excited
phonon mode, where phonon exchange would lead to a modiﬁcation of the product
angular distribution. Perhaps a better implementation is in the case of a p(n,γ)d
reaction under conditions where the neutron and gamma momenta are matched,
again assuming a highly excited phonon mode. When the neutron and gamma
momentum are equal in magnitude and collinear, the emission in the absence of
this eﬀect will occur in a M¨ossbauer limit where no phonon exchange occurs.38
Phonon exchange with a highly excited phonon ﬁeld should be able to produce a
modiﬁcation in the resulting momentum matched angular distribution.
(3) In the discussion that follows we will be interested in conditions under which 20
or more units of angular momentum are exchanged through this mechanism in
association with excess heat production. We estimated previously that a criterion
for this is that the displacement of helium nuclei in relevant sites due to a single
highly excited phonon mode should be on the order of 100 fm (independent of the
phonon mode frequency). Consequently, we are interested in the issue of how such
phonon excitation is developed in diﬀerent experiments to initiate an excess heat
eﬀect. We have proposed previously that this can be accomplished by driving a
deuterium ﬂux inside the metal deuteride down a sharp chemical potential step
(which might be present inside the metal between diﬀerent regions, in the vicinity
of layers of diﬀerent materials, or in the case of exothermic desorption of a highly
loaded PdD sample). Evidence in support of this comes from the existence of a
current threshold in association with the excess heat eﬀect, with the associated
interpretation that only when the threshold is reached is there suﬃcient phononic
excitation to transfer 20 or more units of angular momentum.


5. Null Reactions

If there can be new site-other-site reactions, as implied by the fast alpha experi-
ments, the question might be asked as to what the fastest reaction of this kind might
be, considering all possible atomic and nuclear mechanisms. Our initial speculation
was that in the case of an initial phonon-coupled fusion process of the form d+d →
4He (which we considered because of its implication in fast alpha emission), that
the reaction rate would be fastest if coupled to the inverse process. In the case of
a two-site reaction process, this would produce a reaction of the form
(d + d)a + (4He)b −→ (4He)a + (d + d)b
The original proposal involved phonon exchange at both sites, both to satisfy the
microscopic selection rules and also to provide a mechanism for coupling the re-
actions together. In light of the discussion in the previous section, our simplistic
notion of the null reaction is probably useful for pedagogical purposes, but would
not correspond precisely to the microscopic physics since the individual transitions
do not involved phonon exchange through a local Duschinsky mechanism.

In the initial analysis of this process it appeared that localized states might be
produced. The initial argument was that as the Coulomb barrier inhibited tunneling
in the case of deuterons tunneling initially from an atomic scale separation, the
same Coulomb barrier should inhibit tunneling to an atomic scale separation. Our
initial calculations seemed to support this notion, as long as transitions between
several sites occured.
Our current point of view has led to a more complicated
picture, in which both the null reaction and the compact states are present, but as
part of a more complex process. In this picture, initial transitions from D2 states
associated with double site occupancy would go initially to compact n+3He states,
thus satisfying the requirement for a Duschinsky transition. Compact n+3He states
would undergo transitions to 4He states,j and it is these transitions which would be
important in stabilizing the compact states. This leads us to our next conjecture:
Conjecture V:
Null reactions are the dominant processes of the new phonon-coupled
site-other-site reactions in metal deuterides.

As presently conceived, the most important and fastest of these are phonon-induced
transitions between helium nuclei and compact n+3He states in metal deuterides.

5.1. The Two-Site Problem:
The simplest model that we can formulate that illustrates how site-other-site inter-
actions might work within the new theory is the two-site problem. We proposed a
version of this model earlier,25 in the context of null reactions based on d+d→4He
transitions. Since that time our point of view has changed some, and our focus now
is on diﬀerent aspects of the model. In the case of a simple scalar nuclear physics
model, the two-site problem can be studied using a trial wavefunction of the form
The optimization of the lattice channel separation factors in this case leads to
coupled-channel equations which are provided in the Appendix. Our interest previ-
ously was in the question of whether the two-site problem permitted stable bound
state solutions, and if so whether the associated wavefunctions could be found. Al-
though this question remains of interest to us, there are other issues that might
proﬁtably be considered.

A useful concept for a class of problems in quantum mechanics is the notion of
a leaky well and nearly bound states. If one has a ﬁnite well with ﬁnite barriers,
it may be possible to develop approximate bound states of the well. Since we have
assumed that the barriers are ﬁnite, this approximate bound state will leak out of
the well with a decay time that could be estimated through standard techniques.
It would then be possible to use these unstable states as approximate basis states
to calculate the dynamics (and other properties) of a particle within the lossy well.
If we restricted our attention to the region inside the well, then we could make
much progress from a knowledge of the nearly bound state energy, wavefunction,
and decay rate. A ﬁnite basis description for the probability amplitude within the
well could be developed in the form
The expansion coeﬃcients would satsify and equation of the form
If the basis states uj are approximately eigenfunctions within the well, then the
matrix H will be approximately diagonal with the nearly bound state energy eigen-
values. In this case the approximately diagonal matrix G would contain the decay
rates for the diﬀerent nearly bound states.

We can use this picture in connection with the two-site problem (or with many-
site problems as well). Associated with each channel in the coupled-channel equa-
tions we could assign a localized basis state which could in principle be optimized.
Associated with each basis state an energy could be estimated (including kinetic
and potential terms, but not including source terms). An estimate for the decay
rate could be obtained (although there are probably elegant ways to do this, if all
else fails one could solve for the rate of probability loss channel by channel when
source terms are present). In the end, what is of interest in the development of a
lossy matrix equation is a collection of energies, decay rates, and coupling matrix
elements for the localized basis states in all of the channels.

The outcome of this kind of model is a variety of conclusions, most of them
obvious. We ﬁnd that localization increases the kinetic and centripetal energy terms,
and that the degree of localization is determined by the nuclear interaction terms
with phonon exchange vnn′
lm – which depends on the maximum relative displacement
|∆uqmax|, assuming that n is large. We also ﬁnd that the decay rates go down
with increasing angular momentum l, and that the range of angular momentum l
produced again depends on the maximum relative displacement |∆uqmax| and the
number of phonons exchanged. We can think of the localized ﬁnite basis expansion
in this case as being of the form
The coeﬃcients cj,n(t) would then satisfy an equation of the form
We end up with a potentially complicated description of the dynamics where the
state energies, decay rates and coupling matrix elements all come into play. Al-
though we have investigated a variety of approaches and approximations for the
solution of the two-site problem, we do not have in hand solutions at present. The
consideration of this problem has nevertheless taught us much about how to think
about this kind of problem, how to begin to approach problems where more sites
are involved, and also what kinds of simpler models might be relevant and illumi-
nating about such problems. Our conclusion from these studies so far is that when
suﬃcient angular momentum transfer occurs, the centripetal barrier inhibits tun-
neling and the associated decay rates become very small. In this limit, we think it
quite probable that rather stable compact states result in the case of the many-site
version of the problem. This leads us to the following conjecture:
Conjecture VI:
Null reactions in metal deuterides can result in stable compact states
when suﬃcient phonon exchange occurs so that on the order of 20 or
more units of angular momentum are exchanged.

5.2. Connection with Experiment:
(1) The stabilization of localized states through angular momentum exchange in as-
sociation with phonon exchange is a very interesting possibility in addressing the
problem of how the new proposed phonon-nuclear reactions might compete against
the very fast conventional d+d reactions. If a high centripetal barrier is present,
then the conventional d+d reactions can be slowed down by tens of orders of
magnitude.
(2) Kasagi has reported the observation of unexpected fast proton and fast alpha
signals that he has conjectured are due to a three-body reaction41
d + d + d −→ n + p + 4He
For such a reaction to occur, a single deuteron would need to come into contact
with two deuterons that are within roughly 10 fermis, which is exceedingly unlikely
without new physics. We have conjectured that these experiments may be inter-
preted as detecting two-body compact states as discussed in the section above.42
The compact states in this case would originate from deuterons in states of dou-
ble occupancy in the metal deuteride, and hence have energies close to the two
deuteron energy.
The number of compact states consistent with Kasagi’s measurements, and also
with similar experiments done recently at NRL,43 is on the order of 10−6 of the
deuterons present in the near-surface part of the lattice. Such a large number of
compact states would lead to very high rates of conventional dd-fusion products
unless there was some mechanism to stabilize the compact states. Estimates of the
phonon exchange potentials suggest that it is relatively easy for signiﬁcant angular
momentum exchange to occur when many phonons are exchanged, suggesting that
the compact states may have high angular momentum. The centripetal barrier
present when there are on the order of 20 units of angular momentum or more is
Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on Cold Fusion, Cambridge, MA (2003) c⃝World Scientiﬁc
suﬃcient to suppress the tunneling of fusion reaction products. Support for this
conjecture comes from the relative absence of products from the two-body reaction
channel in these experiments
d + d + d −→ d + 4He
d + d + d −→ t + 3He
The relative absence of the two-body exit channels is consistent with the presence
of signiﬁcant angular momentum in the compact state.
(3) Information about the degree of localization of the compact state could in principle
be obtained in Kasagi experiments in which the incident deuteron energy is varied.
(4) Information about the amount of angular momentum present could in principle
be obtained using a diﬀerent incident particle for which only two-body reaction
products are available.
In this case, conservation of angular momentum would
require that the incident particle would need to contribute angular momentum in
order to open channels with reduced angular momentum (and hence centripetal
potential).
(5) A interesting and important question is whether compact states might exist in
the case of the p+d system. One might expect a Duschinsky phonon exchange
mechanism to be available for compact p+p+n localized states.


6. Energy Exchange between Nuclei and Phonons

One of the most diﬃcult things to accept in the initial claim of the Fleischmann-
Pons eﬀect was the possibility of converting nuclear quanta to heat in the absence of
fast ions or neutrons. This issue has been of major concern in our studies over the
past 15 years. In recent years we have favored models in which the energy exchange
occurs a few phonon quanta at a time in association with a large number of very
fast reactions. Our next conjecture is concerned with this issue:
Conjecture VII:
If suﬃcient angular momentum exchange occurs so as to stabilize the
compact states, then the phonon exchange that occurs in association with
null reactions couples energy eﬀectively between nuclear and phononic
degrees of freedom.

6.1. Phonon-Coupled SU(3) Model:
In our discussion of the two-site model, we ended up with many lossy nuclear states
coupled to potentially many states of a highly-excited phonon mode, and an asso-
ciated matrix description given by Equation (33). To begin trying to understand
the physical content of that model and more complicated models involving interac-
tions between many sites, we turn our attention to much simpler toy models which
seek to retain important features of the full model but are easier to analyze and to
understand. The simplest possible model that has the potential of being relevant
to this problem is the phonon-coupled SU(3) model. In this model, we assume that
at a given site we may have three diﬀerent kinds of states: deuterons with double
occupancy, compact n+3He states, and 4He ground states.
Transitions between 
compact states and 4He states occur with a large interaction strength, and occurs
with enough phonon exchange to stabilize the compact states. Transitions between
deuteron states and compact states occurs with a much weaker interaction due to
the poor overlap between the molecular wavefunction associated with double occu-
pancy and the compact nuclear states. All sites are assumed to interact uniformly
with the highly excited phonon mode. The associated Hamiltonian is
The energies of the diﬀerent nuclear states E4He, Ecom, and Emol correspond to
4He states, compact states, and two-deuteron molecular (double occupancy) states
within the metal deuteride, respectively. The phonon energy is ℏω0. The tunneling
of two deuterons from the atomic scale to the nuclear scale is accounted for through
the tunneling factor e−G. The nuclear interaction strengths are denoted by U and
V , with phonon exchange accounted for by ˆδnn′ operators. This model is assumed
to be augmented by additional decay matrix Γ which accounts for the decay of
unstable localized states where energetically and kinematically allowed.

Studies that we have done so far indicate that in the absence of loss terms,
there is little energy transfer between the nuclear and phononic degree of freedom
under conditions where there are a great many phonons present and states with large
Dicke numbers are used. The presence of loss terms breaks the underlying symmetry
within the system, and leads to reasonably free transfer of energy between the two
degrees of freedom. The conditions under which this occurs was found to be when
roughly 15 or more compact states and helium nuclei were present, assuming that
suﬃcient angular momentum transfer occurs to stabilize the compact states.25 If
insuﬃcient angular momentum is present in the compact states, then they decay
through the conventional dd-fusion channel prior to losing energy to the phonon
mode. Our studies so far support the conjecture above.

6.2. Connection with Experiment:
(1) The phonon-coupled SU(3) model sheds light on how nuclear energy can exchange
with phonon energy, and indicates that there may be some merit to Fleischmann’s
conjecture of a new physical process that accomplishes d+d→4He with the excess
energy going into heat. Experimental observations of 4He in connection with excess
energy measurements44 indicates a reaction Q value in the range of 24 MeV, in
agreement with the theoretical expectation.
(2) Within the phonon-coupled SU(3) model an excess heat eﬀect would be expected
at high angular momentum exchange, whereas other decay modes (such as dd-
fusion) would be dominant at lower angular momentum exchange. If we accept a
connection between the electrochemical current density and the strength of phonon
excitation, then we might expect from this kind of model low level fusion products
at low current density but no excess heat, and excess heat at high current density
but no dd-fusion products. In the early 1990s it was noted that there was great
similarities between the electrochemical experiments run by K. Wolf in association
with neutron measurements,45 and those of the SRI group in association with ex-
cess heat measurements. Perhaps the most important diﬀerence was in the current
density used. In the Wolf experiments, the preliminary cathode charging was done
at 20 mA/cm2, and evidence for neutron emission was obtained at an elevated
current density of 30 mA/cm2 (and according to Wolf, the range of current den-
sities in which neutron emission was observed was relatively narrow). In the SRI
experiments,39 the excess heat eﬀect appeared to turn on at a current threshold in
the range of 200-300 mA/cm2. If we propose that the angular momentum transfer
in these experiments is proportional to the square root of the current density, then
we conclude that neutron emission is produced at an angular momentum exchange
a factor of three below that required for the onset of excess heat. This is qualita-
tively in agreement with the models under discussion (it is not yet known if there
is quantitative agreement).
(3) The models under discussion convert nuclear energy to phonon energy in the mode
that caused the interactions in the ﬁrst place. This is much like the case of stim-
ulated emission in lasers, where the atomic transition energy goes into the modes
of the photons that caused the transition.
In this case, the model describes a
rather strange kind of nonlinear phonon laser. The metal deuteride is the phonon
gain medium. When the phonon amplitude is made suﬃciently large to initiate
reactions, then lasing occurs. Once the system is inputting energy into the highly
excited phonon mode, it may be able to self sustain. This notion is reﬂected in
excess heat experiments that show a “heat after death” eﬀect, in which power
input is removed but excess heat production is sustained.40


7. Slow Tritium Production

There have been many reports of slow tritium production in experiments with metal
deuterides since 1989.46 The tritium produced in these experiments is generated in
the absence of neutrons, so it is not due to the conventional d+d → p+t reaction
pathway. Moreover, neutron measurements performed in association with tritium
production indicate that there is an absence of 14 MeV neutrons that would be
associated with d+t → n+4He reactions.47 The relative absence of neutrons implies
that the tritium must be born slow, and measurements allow for an upper limit of
triton energy to be estimated at about 10 keV.48

The models under discussion appear to be relevant to slow tritium production.
Within the general framework under discussion, slow tritium production appears as
a consequence of the inclusion of p+t double occupancy. This leads to the conjecture
Conjecture VIII:
Slow tritium production in metal deuterides is a consequence of tunnel-
ing from the compact state population to a double occupancy (molecular)
HT state within the metal deuteride. A similar mechanism is not present
for tunneling to n+3He states as the neutron does not remain localized.

7.1. Phonon-Coupled SU(4) Model for Tritium Production:
The simplest possible model that appears to be relevant to tritium production is
the phonon coupled SU(4) model. The associated Hamiltonian is given by
The basic idea here is to recognize that double occupancy of a participating site
with HT should be included within the scheme on equal footing to double occupancy
with D2, and that no similar construction is possible for the n+3He channel. Exper-
imental observations of tritium production within neutron detectors have indicated
an absence of fast neutrons in association with the tritium. In this model react-
ing deuterons in the lattice give up their energy to phonons, and produce bound
HT in double occupancy. Consideration of this kind of model to date suggest that
tritium production may occur in a regime in which insuﬃcient energy transfer oc-
curs to reach 4He, and where protons and tritons are present initially in the metal
deuteride.

7.2. Connection with Experiment:
(1) The existence of a clear pathway for tritium production within the model that is
much like the pathway for excess heat production, but comes without an equivalent
n+3He pathway is in qualitative agreement with the experimental results.46,47
(2) The model predicts that there should be an excess heat eﬀect in association with
tritium production. No such eﬀect has been detected experimentally yet.
(3) The models under discussion suggest the possibility of an exclusion eﬀect between
heat and tritium production.
The idea is that under conditions of very strong
coupling, the compact state probability amplitude will simply bypass the tritium
channel tunneling exit. If coherence factors are important as we expect, then what-
ever process starts ﬁrst will be reinforced leading to an exclusion of the other. If
this line of argument is right, then one would expect there to be a current thresh-
old for tritium production that lies between the threshold for neutron production
and excess heat production.


8. Dynamics, Tunneling, and Coherence

One of the most diﬃcult things to theoretical models to address in association with
the experimental results is the tremendous acceleration of the tunneling process
between deuterons which is implied by the relatively fast reaction rates. There have
been (and there continue to be) eﬀorts to account for this through enhancements
in screening due to one mechanism or another. We have concluded that there is no
reasonable physical basis for screening enhancements as large as would be required
to be consistent with the slowest of the low-level fusion reaction claims.49 Moreover,
an enhancement of the screening does not help make progress on other important
apsects of the outstanding theoretical issues.

It is known that the dynamics would be modiﬁed signiﬁcantly if there were a
localized nuclear state with an energy resonant with the two deuteron state, and
if decoherence could somehow be ignored.
In this case, the mathematical solu-
tions involve Rabi oscillations between the resonant atomic scale and nuclear scale
states, with greatly enhanced tunneling.50 Although there is no stable resonant
four nucleon state in vacuum with the right energy (and there is no way to suppress
decoherence), we recognize this model as being important nevertheless. It makes
clear the diﬀerence between tunneling as part of an incoherent process, where the
reaction rate is proportional to the square of the matrix element (and the tunneling
is proportional to e−2G); and tunneling as part of a coherent process, where the
reaction rate is linear in the matrix element (and the tunneling is proportional to
e−G). The existence of this idealized resonant tunneling model suggests that we
should seek theoretical models in which the tunneling comes in coherently, and that
this eﬀect is ultimately the source of the great acceleration in tunneling. This leads
us to the conjecture:
Conjecture IX:
Tunneling between deuterons (or other nuclei) can occur in connection
with other fast processes that are coherent, such that the associated rate
is linear in the tunneling factor e−G.

Models where tunneling comes into the calculation with a dependence of the form
e−2G do not lead to reaction rates that are commensurate with experimental claims.

8.1. Adiabatic Approximation:
To examine this issue, we examine the dynamics associated with the phonon-coupled
SU(3) model as a representative example of more general models consistent with
Equation (33). The phonon-coupled SU(3) model includes processes that are very
fast (exchange between the compact states and ground state helium levels) and
processes that are very slow (tunneling from the molecular states to the compact
states). Consequently, one might expect a separable approximation to be relevant,
in which the fast processes “equilibrate” on a time scale much shorter than the
tunneling. In this case, we propose an approximate solution of the form
where N is the number of sites with molecular state occupation. The basis states
uN,j satisfy
where ˆH0 includes all terms in the phonon-coupled SU(3) Hamiltonian of Equation
(34) except those associated with tunneling. The dynamics of the system in this
approximation follow from evolution equations of the form
In this equation ˆV includes tunneling terms from Equation (34), and the vN,j are
the adjoint functions associated with the uN,j.

We see immediately a need for the decay rate γN,j of the eigenstates to be small
as a prerequisite for any coherent dynamics. We have remarked above on the need
for large angular momentum exchange to stabilize the compact states. There is
an additional eﬀect present which we observed in the computations discussed in
previous work,25 where we found that the probability amplitude in the quantum
ﬂow calculation avoided states with signiﬁcant loss. Due to the close connection
between those computations and the lossy eigenfunction calculation here, the same
eﬀect occurs in this problem and is greatly helpful in stabilizing the eigenfunctions.

8.2. Limiting Case with a Simple Resonance:
Models of complicated quantum systems can exhibit a wide variety of eﬀects, and
one usually seeks to focus on states or limiting behavior where the speciﬁc eﬀects of
interest are brought out cleanly. In this case, we are interested in speciﬁc solutions
which exhibit rapid accumulation of compact states from states with deuteron pairs
in double occupancy. The simplest example of this is in the case of the phonon-
coupled SU(3) model where we assume that the compact state is resonant with the
molecular state within the metal deuteride.k
In a highly idealized model of this
kind, where we assume that the angular momentum exchange is suﬃciently great
to stabilize the compact states so that the associated γ can be neglected, we would
obtain
iℏ d
dtcN(t) = EcN(t) + ⟨vN| ˆV |uN+1⟩ cN+1(t) + ⟨vN| ˆV |uN−1⟩ cN−1(t)
In this limit we are able to obtain approximate solutions that are sinusoidal with
an associate Rabi oscillation frequency on the order of V0e−G
ℏ
per deuteron pair
in states of double occupancy. We are at once pleased that the phonon-coupled
SU(3) model is capable in some limit of producing an enhanced tunneling eﬀect,
but discouraged because the resulting reaction rate is a few orders of magnitude less
than what is needed to be relevant for experiments in which excess heat is observed.

8.3. Limiting Case with Interaction between Coherent Populations:
The physical picture that corresponds to the idealized model above is one in which
deuterons at the atomic scale tunnel to produce a local resonant stable compact
state at the same site.
Nuclear energy is converted to phononic energy subse-
quently, the dynamics of which are assumed to be fast and accounted for in the uN
eigenfunctions. We can think of this limit of the model as being closely related to
the idealized single-site resonant tunneling model outlined above, and the resulting
reaction rates and dynamics are the same as for the single site model in regard to
the tunneling.

It should be noted that there is another rather general kind of behavior that
might be expected for models that include more compact state levels than the
phonon-coupled SU(3) model. Consider a model in which tunneling initial leads
to a compact state that is not resonant, but involves an energy defect that might
be considerable. Let us suppose that this energy defect is balanced by transitions
at other sites from a compact state at one energy to one at another energy that
precisely balances the energy defect to bring the system back to resonance.
In
this case, the dynamics associated with an idealized model that focus on this eﬀect
would be of the form
iℏ d
dtcN(t) = EcN(t) + ⟨vN| ˆV ′|uN+1⟩ cN+1(t) + ⟨vN| ˆV ′|uN−1⟩ cN−1(t)
where ˆV ′ is of the form
where the ˆΣ± operators are pseudostate raising and lowering operators for the two
systems.

The dynamics associated with this kind of model behave very diﬀerently than for
the resonant SU(3) model discussed above.50 This model describes a new situation
in which the collective tunneling transitions at all participating sites of double
occupancy interact uniformly with collective balancing transitions among compact
states at all of their participating sites. In essence, one population is interacting
collectively, as a population, with another population that is responding collectively,
also as a population. The dynamics associated with this kind of process can be much
faster, with a peak rate that is on the order of √N1N2
V0e−G
ℏ
per deuteron pair
in states of double occupancy, where N1 and N2 are connected with the Dicke
numbers of the individual transitions. The associated dynamics exhibit a “burst”
type of behavior, which is characteristic of superradiant systems (the discussion here
is concerned with a Dicke type enhancement of a coherent quantum process, instead
of incoherent processes such as superradiant radiative decay). This discussion leads
us to our ﬁnal conjecture:l
Conjecture X:
The coherent tunneling process can be enhanced by a phase coherence
between transitions at diﬀerent sites, producing a superradiant enhance-
ment.

We have considered here an idealized example in which tunneling transitions are
balanced by a single collective transition within the compact states. We have not
at this point developed an associated phonon-coupled SU(N) model that exhibits
this eﬀect, but we expect that it will be possible to do so. More interesting is the
question of whether such behavior will be present in more complicated phonon-
coupled SU(N) models.

8.4. Bursts:
The model described in the previous section leads has been studied in a companion
paper,50 and numerical results have been presented for the population evolution and
the associated reaction rates. The reaction rates from that model can be reasonably
approximated by
This dynamical rate satisﬁes
It is reasonable to deﬁne a pulse time scale τ according to
We see that the product of the peak reaction rate with τ is proportional to N, so
that we can form an estimate of N from
We can also express the coupling strength in terms of the rate and time scale
according to
If we consider a representative excess heat pulse with Γ = 1012 sec−1 and τ = 5
hours, and consider it to be due to a single coherent process of the kind under
discussion, then obtain
If we assume that V is 10 MeV, then we obtain
e−G = 3 × 10−44
which is on the general order of the Gamow factor for molecular D2.

8.5. Connection with Experiment:
(1) We mentioned above that the observation of anomalies in all cases imply rates
that are inconsistent with rates which would be predicted for incoherent processes
involving tunneling. Tunneling as a coherent process with a superradiant enhance-
ment leads to reaction rate estimates that are consistent with observations.
(2) Most experimental results on anomalies in metal deuterides (including low-level
dd-fusion, excess heat, and other eﬀects) show a burst eﬀect, in which the eﬀect is
absent, then turns on, then turns oﬀ again.52 We propose that the burst eﬀect is a
consequence of superradiance. In the case of excess heat, the idealized burst model
leads to a relation between the burn rate, the pulse length, and an associated Dicke
number which may be on the order of the number of helium nuclei produced. Such
a relation has not been veriﬁed experimentally, and may not be straightforward to
verify, but may be worthy of study.
(3) In the limit that a single heat burst event is isolated, it may be possible to gain
information about the tunneling factor for a metal deuteride.
(4) We have not yet addressed the issue of what phonon frequencies are involved yet.
The requirement for the exchange of 20 or more phonons in order to stabilize
the compact states produces a requirement on the energy density associated with
phonon excitation, independent of frequency. However, phonon modes are lossy.
The highest power densities reported for excess heat production are in the range
of several kilowatts per cubic centimeter. We conclude therefore that the highest
phonon frequencies likely to be involved are on the order of 1 GHz.
(5) There is no particular diﬀerence between the time-dependence of excess heat bursts
and those associated with neutrons or charged particles. Our studies of the phonon-
coupled SU(N) models so far suggest that the details of the coupling between the
nuclei and phonons is such to result in similar mixing in the nuclear and phonon
degrees of freedom, with similar numbers of phonons exchanged, reasonably inde-
pendent of phonon frequency. However, if the phonon frequency is low, then there
would not be much energy exchange in association with the phonon exchange. It
may be that the primary diﬀerence between the diﬀerent operating regimes may
simply be due to which phonon frequencies are involved. If the nuclear energy is
not converted to phononic energy, then the compact states could reform molecular
states at the end of a pulse, and only a small fraction of the total be expressed as
incoherent products during the process.


9. Conclusions

The most basic conclusion from the ideas and models presented here is that the
new eﬀects, although wildly at variance with what we know from nuclear physics
in textbooks, may follow new physical laws that are reasonable, understandable,
and amenable to analysis on the same footing as in other disciplines. The approach
presented here provides a starting place from which the disparate anomlies might
be understood systematically as consequences of an underlying physical picture.

A unifying picture of the anomalies is emerging from the ideas presented here.
The need for high loading in the Fleischmann-Pons experiment is understood within
the theory as a need for producing double occupancy. Vacancies, high loading and
elevated temperature can all help in this regard.
Current helps to achieve high
loading, but within the theory it is also producing phononic excitation needed to
couple nuclear reactions at diﬀerent sites. Fast alpha emission within the model
is perhaps the most direct signature of that reaction energy from one site can
be expressed at another site. A consideration of the site-other-site mechanism in
detail leads ultimately to the conclusion that there must be compact states, and
anomalous proton and alpha signals in the Kasagi experiment seem to provide
evidence that the compact states are real.
The stability of the compact states
and the relative lack of two-body products from the three-deuteron interaction are
interpreted as being indicative of the ability of the lattice to transfer large amounts
of angular momentum to the microscopic nuclear system. Stable compact states
are predicted to participate in a large number of site-to-site exchange reactions
which help stabilize them and allow for energy exchange with the lattice, which is
supported by experiments that show 4He emission correlated with the excess energy
with a Q value observed to be near 24 MeV. The enormous enhancement in the
tunneling rate is seen within the model to be a signature of Dicke enhanced coherent
tunneling, and the observed reaction rates and dynamics seem to be consistent with
idealized models describing such transitions.

Research on anomalies in metal deuterides has from the beginning not been
included as part of the mainstream scientiﬁc endeavor. There has not existed a
program of systematic investigation into the diﬀerent issues and aspects that we
have been concerned with in this manuscript. Consequently, many of the important
physical statements that might be made are not yet backed up by a solid body of
experiment which might otherwise settle things. For example, we have no direct ob-
servations of deuterons in double occupancy in any of the relevant experiments. We
have no clear demonstration of phonon exchange or angular momentum exchange
in a fusion reaction in isolation. We do not have clean systematic spectra of alphas,
protons and neutrons in connection with the site-other-site reaction mechanism dis-
cussed above, as can be found in the nuclear literature on photodisintegration. The
experimental basis that supports the possible existence and properties of compact
states as discussed above is not particularly strong.

There are many important related issues that we did not discuss in this
manuscript. For example, the models do not obviously exclude similar processes in
the case of the p+d system, which may be relevant to claims of anomalies in light
water experiments. We have not discussed dephasing of the coherence present in the
models. Our discussion has sought to retain a focus on basic physics issues, so we
have not examined issues relating to the optimization of excess heat producing sys-
tems. There are experimental claims for other anomalies, such as the transmutation
eﬀect recently reported by Iwamura, which we have not considered.

It is our belief that continued work along these lines will lead to better models,
and a generally agreed upon satisfactory understanding of the phenomena in general.
We remain interested in the development of engineering models that will be useful
for applications of the technology implied by the new physics.


References

1. G. Preparata, “Cold fusion: what do the laws of nature allow and forbid,” Proceedings
of the First International Conference on Cold Fusion, Mar. 1990 Salt Lake City, UT,
edited by F. Will, p. 453.
2. M. Rabinowitz, Y. E. Kim, V. A. Chechin, and V. A. Tsarev, “Opposition and support
for cold fusion,” Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Cold Fusion,
Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on Cold Fusion, Cambridge, MA (2003) c⃝World Scientiﬁc
Dec. 1993 Maui, Hawaii, edited by T. O. Passell and M. C. H. McKubre, Vol. 1, p.
3. J. Fisher, “Theory of low-temperature particle showers, Proceedings of the Tenth In-
ternational Conference on Cold Fusion, August 2003 Cambridge, MA, edited by P. L.
Hagelstein and S. R. Chubb, World Scientiﬁc, to appear.
4. H. Kozima, “Excited states of nucleons in a nucleus and cold fusion phenomenon in
transition-metal hydrides and deuterides, Proceedings of the Ninth International Con-
ference on Cold Fusion, May 2002 Beijing, China, edited by X. Z. Li, p. 186. H. Kozima,
“CF-matter and the cold fusion phenomenon,” Proceedings of the Tenth International
Conference on Cold Fusion, August 2003 Cambridge, MA, edited by P. L. Hagelstein
and S. R. Chubb, World Scientiﬁc, to appear.
5. Y. E. Kim, D. S. Koltick, and A. L. Zubarev, “Quantum many-body theory of low en-
ergy nuclear reaction induced by acoustic cavitation in deuterated liquid,” Proceedings
of the Tenth International Conference on Cold Fusion, August 2003 Cambridge, MA,
edited by P. L. Hagelstein and S. R. Chubb, World Scientiﬁc, to appear.
6. S. R. Chubb, “Nuts and Bolts of the Ion Band State Theory,” Proceedings of the Tenth
International Conference on Cold Fusion, August 2003 Cambridge, MA, edited by P.
L. Hagelstein and S. R. Chubb, World Scientiﬁc, to appear.
7. T. A. Chubb, “The cold fusion-transmutation connection,”
Proceedings of the Tenth
International Conference on Cold Fusion, August 2003 Cambridge, MA, edited by P.
L. Hagelstein and S. R. Chubb, World Scientiﬁc, to appear.
8. S. Chen and X. Z. Li, “Tritium production and the selective resonant tunneling model,”
Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Cold Fusion, May 2002 Beijing,
China, edited by X. Z. Li, p. 42. X. Z. Li, B. L. Liu, X. Z. Ren, J. Tian, D. X. Cao,
S. Chen, G. H. Pan, D. L. Ho, and Y. Deng, “Super absorption – correlation between
deuterium ﬂux and excess heat,”
Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference
on Cold Fusion, May 2002 Beijing, China, edited by X. Z. Li, p. 202.
S. Chen and
X. Z. Li, Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on Cold Fusion, August
2003 Cambridge, MA, edited by P. L. Hagelstein and S. R. Chubb, World Scientiﬁc, to
appear.
9. A. Takahashi, “Tetrahedral and octahedral resonance fusion under transient conden-
sation of deuterons at lattice focal points,”
Proceedings of the Ninth International
Conference on Cold Fusion, May 2002 Beijing, China, edited by X. Z. Li, p. 343. A.
Takahashi, “Mechanism of deuteron cluster fusion by EQPET model,”
Proceedings
of the Tenth International Conference on Cold Fusion, August 2003 Cambridge, MA,
edited by P. L. Hagelstein and S. R. Chubb, World Scientiﬁc, to appear.
10. G. Preparata, “Theoretical ideas on Cold fusion,” Proceedings of the First Interna-
tional Conference on Cold Fusion, Mar. 1990 Salt Lake City, UT, edited by F. Will,
p. 91.
G. Preparata, “Cold fusion ’93: Some theoretical ideas,”
Proceedings of the
Fourth International Conference on Cold Fusion, Dec. 1993 Maui, Hawaii, edited by T.
O. Passell and M. C. H. McKubre, Vol. 1, p. 12-1. G. Preparata, QED in condensed
matter, World Scientiﬁc, (1995).
11. M. Fleischmann, “Background to cold fusion: The genesis of a concept,” Proceedings
of the Tenth International Conference on Cold Fusion, August 2003 Cambridge, MA,
edited by P. L. Hagelstein and S. R. Chubb, World Scientiﬁc, to appear.
12. V. Violante, C. Sibilia, D. Di Gioacchino, M. McKubre, F. Tanzella, and P. Tripoldi,
Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Cold Fusion, May 2000 Lerici
(La Spezia), Italy, edited by F. Scaramuzzi, p. 409.
13. E. Del Guidice, A. De Ninno, and A. Fratolillo, “Are nuclear transmutations observed
at low energies a consequence of QED coherence?”
Proceedings of the Tenth Inter-
national Conference on Cold Fusion, August 2003 Cambridge, MA, edited by P. L.
Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on Cold Fusion, Cambridge, MA (2003) c⃝World Scientiﬁc
Hagelstein and S. R. Chubb, World Scientiﬁc, to appear.
14. F. Scaramuzzi, “In memory of Giuliano Preparata,” Proceedings of the Eighth Inter-
national Conference on Cold Fusion, May 2000 Lerici (La Spezia), Italy, edited by F.
Scaramuzzi, p. XXI.
15. M. C. H. McKubre, S. Crouch-Baker, A. M. Riley, S. I. Smedley, and F. L. Tanzella,
Frontiers of Cold Fusion, Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Cold
Fusion, Oct. 1992 Nagoya, Japan, edited by H. Ikegami, Universal Academy Press,
Tokyo, p. 5. K. Kunimatsu, N. Hasegawa, A. Kubota, N. Imai, M. Ishikawa, H. Akita,
and Y. Tsuchida,
Frontiers of Cold Fusion, Proceedings of the Third International
Conference on Cold Fusion, Oct. 1992 Nagoya, Japan, edited by H. Ikegami, Universal
Academy Press, Tokyo, p. 31.
16. M. Fleischmann and S. Pons, Frontiers of Cold Fusion, Proceedings of the Third In-
ternational Conference on Cold Fusion, Oct. 1992 Nagoya, Japan, edited by H. Ikegami,
Universal Academy Press, Tokyo, p. 47.
17. E. Storms, “Some characteristics of heat production using the ‘cold fusion’ eﬀect,”
Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Cold Fusion, Dec. 1993 Maui,
Hawaii, edited by T. O. Passell and M. C. H. McKubre, Vol. 2, p. 4-1.
18. L. Case, in his oral presentation at ICCF10.
19. A. G. Lipson, A.S. Roussetski, G.H. Miley, and E.I. Saunin, Proceedings of the Eighth
International Conference on Cold Fusion, May 2000 Lerici (La Spezia), Italy, edited by
F. Scaramuzzi, p. 231. A. G. Lipson, A.S. Roussetski, G.H. Miley, and C. H. Castano,
Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Cold Fusion, May 2002 Beijing,
China, edited by X. Z. Li, p. 218.
20. A. G. Lipson, A.S. Roussetski, G.H. Miley, and E.I. Saunin, “Phenomenon of an Ener-
getic Charged Particle Emission From Hydrogen/Deuterium Loaded Metals,” Proceed-
ings of the Tenth International Conference on Cold Fusion, August 2003 Cambridge,
MA, edited by P. L. Hagelstein and S. R. Chubb, World Scientiﬁc, to appear.
21. G. P. Chambers, J. E. Eridon, K. S. Grabowski, B. D. Sartwell and D. B. Chrisey,
“Charged Particle Spectra of Palladium Thin Films During Low Energy Deuterium Ion
Implantation,” J. Fusion Energy, 9, 281 (1990).
22. P. L. Hagelstein, “Anomalous Energy Transfer,”
Proceedings of The Seventh Inter-
national Conference on Cold Fusion, Vancouver, Canada, April 19-24, 1998, ENECO,
Inc., Salt Lake City, UT (1998), p. 140.
23. P. L. Hagelstein, “A model for fast ion emission in metal deuterides,” Bull. APS 45
235 (2000).
24. P. L. Hagelstein, “A uniﬁed model for anomalies in metal deuterides,”
Proceedings
of the Eighth International Conference on Cold Fusion, May 2000 Lerici (La Spezia),
Italy, edited by F. Scaramuzzi, p. 363.
P. L. Hagelstein, “Theory for Anomalies in
Metal Deuterides,” Trans. Am. Nucl. Soc. 83, p. 359 (2000).
25. P. L. Hagelstein, “A uniﬁed model for anomalies in metal deuterides,” Proceedings of
the Ninth International Conference on Cold Fusion, May 2002 Beijing, China, edited
by X. Z. Li, p. 121.
26. J. A. Wheeler, Phys. Rev. 52 1107 (1937). J. R. Pruett, F. M. Beiduk and E. J.
Konopinski, Phys. Rev., 77, 628 (1950). H. J. Boersma, Nucl. Phys., A135, p. 609
27. N. Bohr, Nature, 137, 344 (1936). V. Weisskopf, Phys. Rev., 52, 295 (1937). V. F.
Weisskopf and D. H. Ewing, Phys. Rev., 57, 472 (1940). H. Feshbach, Theoretical
Nuclear Physics: Nuclear Reactions, John Wiley and Sons, New York (1992).
28. E. D. Courant, Phys. Rev., 82, 703 (1951).
29. R. N. H. Haslam, A. G. W. Cameron, J. A. Cooke, and H. Crosby, Can. J. Phys., 30,
349 (1952).
Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on Cold Fusion, Cambridge, MA (2003) c⃝World Scientiﬁc
30. F. E. Cecil, H. Liu, D. Beddingﬁeld, and C. S. Galovich, Anomalous Nuclear Eﬀects in
Deuterium/Solid Systems, Provo, UT 1990, American Institute of Physics: Conference
Proceedings, edited by S.E Jones, F. Scaramuzzi, and D.H. Worledge, 228, p. 375. H.
Liu, Studies of nuclear reactions D-D, D-6Li, and D-10B at low energies and charged
particle emission from deuterium-metal systems, PhD Thesis, Colorado School of Mines,
31. C. H. Holbrow and H. H. Barschall, Nucl. Phys., 42, 269 (1963).
32. M. Agnello, E. Botta, T. Bressani, D. Calvo, A. Feliciello, P. Gianotti, F. Iazzi, C.
Lamberti, B. Minetti, and Z. Zecchina,
Frontiers of Cold Fusion, Proceedings of the
Third International Conference on Cold Fusion, Oct. 1992 Nagoya, Japan, edited by
H. Ikegami, Universal Academy Press, Tokyo, p. 433.
33. P. L. Hagelstein, Anomalies in Metal Deuterides, ﬁnal report to Darpa, April, 2003.
34. F. Duschinsky, “Zur Deutung der Elekronenspektren mehratomiger Molekule I. Uber
das Franck-Condon-Prinzip,” Acta Physicochimica U.R.S.S. 7, 551 (1937).
35. P. L. Hagelstein, “Atom-atom correlation in the presence of strong terahertz phonon
excitation,” Philosophical Magazine B 79 149 (1999).
36. E. Feenberg and J. K. Knipp, Phys. Rev., 48, 906 (1935).
37. I. Chaudhary and P. L. Hagelstein, “Few-body nuclear wave functions,” Proceedings
of the Tenth International Conference on Cold Fusion, August 2003 Cambridge, MA,
edited by P. L. Hagelstein and S. R. Chubb, World Scientiﬁc, to appear.
38. P. L. Hagelstein, “A Possible Mossbauer Eﬀect in Neutron Capture,” Hyperﬁne Inter-
actions 92 1059 (1994). This paper was presented at the 1993 International Conference
on Applications of the Mossbauer Eﬀect (ICAME93).
39. M. C. H. McKubre, S. Crouch-Baker, F. L. Tanzella, S. I. Smedley, M. Williams, S.
Wing, M. Maly-Schreiber, R. C. Rocha-Filho, P. C. Searson, J. G. Pronko, and D.
A. Koehler, Development of Advanced Concepts for Nuclear Processes in Deuterated
Metals, EPRI Final Report TR-104195, August 1994. M. C. H. McKubre, “Review of
experimental measurements involving dd-reactions,” ICCF10 short course presentation,
August 25, 2003.
40. S. Pons and M. Fleischmann, “Heat after Death,”
Proceedings of the Fourth Inter-
national Conference on Cold Fusion, Dec. 1993 Maui, Hawaii, edited by T. O. Passell
and M. C. H. McKubre, Vol. 2, p. 8-1.
41. J. Kasagi, T. Ohtsuki, K. Ishu and M. Hiraga, Phys. Soc. Japan 64, 777 (1995).
42. P. L. Hagelstein, “A proposed explanation for the Kasagi eﬀect,” Bull. APS 46, 946
43. G.K. Hubler, C. Cetina, D.L. Knies and K.S. Grabowski, “Report on Several On-Going
Low Energy Nuclear Reaction Projects at NRL,” oral presentation given at ICCF10.
44. M. H. Miles, “Correlation of excess enthalpy and helium-4 production: A review,”
Proc. ICCF10 (2003). F. Cellucci, P. L. Cignini, G. Gigli, D. Gozzi, M. Tomellini, E.
Cisbani, S. Frullani, F. Garibaldi, M. Jodice, and G. M. Urciuoli, Proceedings of the
Sixth International Conference on Cold Fusion, October 1996 Hokkaido, Japan, edited
by M. Okamoto, p. 3.
45. K. L. Wolf, J. Shoemaker, D. E. Coe, and L. Whitesell, “Neutron emission from
deuterium-loaded metals,”
Anomalous Nuclear Eﬀects in Deuterium/Solid Systems,
Provo, UT 1990, American Institute of Physics: Conference Proceedings, edited by S.E
Jones, F. Scaramuzzi, and D.H. Worledge, 228, p. 341.
Figures for this manuscript
did not appear in the proceedings, but were provided to the author by K. Wolf. K. L.
Wolf, “Nuclear Reactions in Deuterated Metals,” EPRI Progress Report, March 1992.
46. T. N. Claytor, D. G. Tuggle, and S. F. Taylor, Frontiers of Cold Fusion, Proceedings
of the Third International Conference on Cold Fusion, Oct. 1992 Nagoya, Japan, edited
by H. Ikegami, Universal Academy Press, Tokyo, p. 217. D. G. Tuggle, T. N. Claytor,
Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on Cold Fusion, Cambridge, MA (2003) c⃝World Scientiﬁc
and S. F. Taylor, Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Cold Fusion,
Dec. 1993 Maui, Hawaii, edited by T. O. Passell and M. C. H. McKubre, Vol. 1, p. 7-1.
47. S. F. Taylor, T. N. Claytor, D. G. Tuggle, and S. E. Jones, Proceedings of the Fourth
International Conference on Cold Fusion, Dec. 1993 Maui, Hawaii, edited by T. O.
Passell and M. C. H. McKubre, Vol. 3, p. 17-1.
48. P. L. Hagelstein, Proceedings of the First International Conference on Cold Fusion,
Mar. 1990 Salt Lake City, UT, edited by F. Will, p. 99.
49. K. P. Sinha and Peter L. Hagelstein, “Electron screening in metal deuterides,” Pro-
ceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Cold Fusion, May 2000 Lerici (La
Spezia), Italy, edited by F. Scaramuzzi, p. 369.
50. P. L. Hagelstein, “Resonant tunneling and resonant excitation transfer,” Proceedings
of the Tenth International Conference on Cold Fusion, August 2003 Cambridge, MA,
edited by P. L. Hagelstein and S. R. Chubb, World Scientiﬁc, to appear.
51. G. Preparata, “Theoretical ideas on cold fusion,”
Proceedings of the First Interna-
tional Conference on Cold Fusion, Mar. 1990 Salt Lake City, UT, edited by F. Will, p.
52. M. Fleischmann, “An overview of cold fusion,” Proceedings of the First International
Conference on Cold Fusion, Mar. 1990 Salt Lake City, UT, edited by F. Will, p. 344.


Appendix: Coupled-Channel Equations for the Two-Site Problem
The optimization of the lattice channel separation factors in this case leads to
coupled-channel equations of the form
We have studied equations similar to these, with the conclusion that they give rise to
signiﬁcant exchange eﬀects as well as compact state solutions (which can be stable or
unstable). The compact state energies are dependent on the strength of coupling, as well
as the angular momentum transferred through phonon exchange.
