1. Introduction

Our work consists of two parts. In the first stage, we carried out investigations of
the influence of the deformation of titanium alloy samples saturated with deuterium
on the occurrence of cold nuclear fusion.1 The basic results of these investigations
were obtained in the years 1990–1992.

In the beginning of this work, we started with the assumption that the structure of metals influences the processes proceeding in a solid phase. Obviously, the
intrinsic properties of a metallic matrix are responsible not only for the ability of a
material to accumulate deuterons but also for the possibility of deuterons to move
and interact. That is why the processes occurring during the cold fusion should be
sensitive to the structure of the metals and alloys used.

As is known, plastic deformation changes the character of the distribution, and
increases the density, of crystal lattice defects – dislocations, vacancies, stacking
faults, and low and high angle grain boundaries.2 It is also well known3 that hydrogen isotopes, being interstitial atoms, interact with crystal lattice defects creating
atmospheres of impurity atoms. One can expect that during plastic deformation
the migration of these defects should influence the rate of the processes occurring
during the fusion of deuteron nucleus.


2. Neutron measurements

In the initial stage of our investigations, we detected neutrons using a field monitor
(RUP-1) with a fast-neutron counter. The radiation detected in this case correlated
in time with processes occurring during the saturation by deuterium, or during
the deformation of deuterium saturated samples. The titanium alloy VT9 (6.5Al–
3.3Mo–1.5Zr–0.25Si) was used for the investigations. For these studies, we use
cylindrical samples with dimensions 10× 15 mm, that were saturated by deuterium from a gas phase up to concentration 2–20 at.%. Deformation of the samples was
carried out by compression uusing the scheme showed in Figure 1. Figure 1. Scheme of deformation of samples by successive three-step compression.

The temperature of deformation was selected on the basis of differential thermal
analysis (DTA) data (Fig. 2). At the temperature T ≈ 650 ◦C, the weight of a
sample starts to reduce, and a bend is observed on the DTA curve that testifies
an intense escape of deuterium from a sample in the argon atmosphere. In the
process of deformation of titanium alloy samples (at a temperature T = 710 ◦C),
preliminarily saturated by deuterium, radiation, which is not a neutron flux, was
detected. Figure 3 shows the time dependence of the load during deformation of
the samples. Figure 4 presents the (x-y) coordinate record of the emission detected
by the field-effect monitor RUP-1. The break of deformation, or the increase in
the strain rate by 10 times and more, resulted in a disappearance of the emission.
In Fig. 3, the letters A and B indicate the time moments at which the traverse
movement was stopped, and the same symbols indicate the periods of the absence
of deformation in Fig. 4. Figure 2. Temperature dependence of (1) differential thermal analysis and (2) weight of VT9
alloy sample, CD = 0, 26 at.%. Figure 3. Load (P) vs. elongation (l) curves for successive three-step compression of VT9 alloy
sample, T = 710 ◦C, concentration of deuterium CD = 12, 3 at.%, V = 0, 264 mm/min, A and
B—points of deformation stop. Figure 4. An experimental curve of the signal from a universal monitor RUP-1 with a neutron
detector during the deformation of sample No. 2 in the third stage of deformation. T = 710 ◦C;
CD = 12, 3 at.%; V = 0, 264 mm/min, A and B—points of deformation stop.

Two batches of VT9 alloy samples were studied. The first batch of samples have
a structure with the size of primary β grains 500 ± 100 µm, α plate thickness of
6 ± 1 µm, and the amount of β phase about 20%. Deuterium saturation of these
samples did not lead to any significant changes in the structure, except for the
growth of the amount of β phase up to 50%. The microstructure of the second
batch of samples was characterized by the absence of α plates at matrix β grain
boundaries. Its α plates were bent and their thickness did not exceed 1 ± 0.1 µm

Three samples from the first batch were deformed at the temperate T = 710 ◦C,
and radiation was registered from two of them. The concentration of deuterium in
these samples was CD = 11–12 at.%, while in the third sample it was considerably
lower – CD = 8 at.%. The samples of the second batch possessed more fine structure,
and the radiation in these samples was detected only after their structure became
similar to that of the first batch samples.


3. Tritium measurements

To confirm the occurrence of cold nuclear fusion, the measurement of tritium concentration was performed by the scintillation method via layerwise grinding. It was
found that in all samples in which emission was detected during deformation, the
concentration of tritium in the surface layer was increased by 3–7 times as compared
to the background value.1 The energy spectrum of these samples corresponded to
tritium.

We did not publish the results of this work in 1992 because the field monitor
RUP-1 with a fast-neutron counter is not a reliable device to be used for scientific
purposes. We have procured the radiometric device SRPS-2 having fast-neutron
counters with a lamp SI-18H filled by 3He. Using this new device, we deformed
about 50 samples but no appreciable neutron fluxes were registered.

After that, we conducted a joint experiment with a group of scientists from
Ekaterinburg, on neutron detection in the process of saturation of our samples by
deuterium. Whereas MKS-01 (a device similar to RUP-1) registered neutrons, the
device SRPS-2 (the sensitivity of which is 100 times higher than that of MKS-01)
did not register. Having performed this experiment we assumed that we registered
electromagnetic radiation with a spectrum in the radio frequency regime. The
tritium concentration was increased by 50% as compared to the background level
evenly throughout the volume of this sample. The uniform distribution of tritium
within the sample interior after its saturation by deuterium does not contradict the
previous conclusion about the nonuniformity of the distribution, since a sufficiently
high temperature applied during the present experiment leads to a convectiondiffusion leveling of the deuterium concentration


4. RF measurements

In the second stage, we attempted the measurement of the (RF) radiation that we
assumed was present during experiments in the first stage. In these experiments
we attempted to measure radio-frequency radiation only during saturation of samples by deuterium, using various detection systems. Neutron detection with the
radiometric device SRPS-2 was conducted during all our subsequent experiments.

Electromagnetic emission in the range of radio frequencies was detected by using
different measuring devices:
(1) A magnetic antenna with one turn in a symmetric copper ring with a notch. A
signal from the antenna was transmitted to a wide-band amplifier UZ-29, then to
an amplifier with a gain factor of K = 104 (10 in a fourth degree), and after that
to a ratemeter.
(2) A field meter M20 of optoelectronics (USA) with a telescopic antenna, 10 cm in
length.
(3) An electron scheme comprising an antenna, 10 cm in length, a pulse amplifier with
a gain factor of K = 5×103 (five increased on 10 in the third degree), discriminator
and former drawing in a short signal for its recording.
For visualization of the emission detected in all cases, the signal is transmitted
to an x-y coordinate plotter.

Electromagnetic emission in the range of radio frequencies was detected during
the saturation of titanium alloy VT-9 samples by deuterium from the gas phase
at the temperature T = 860 ± 10 ◦C. Prior to the saturation the samples were
subjected to a bend strain at the room temperature in a three-point mode until the
onset of plastic deformation.
RF emission has been detected under the conditions of continuously increasing
pressure of deuterium. The rate of deuterium pressure increase was dp
dt ≈ 0.8 kPa/s. The signal appeared at a pressure of p ≈ 24 kPa and continued for 2–3 min. RF
emission was detected by means of each scheme described above. However, while
in the case of the third scheme, the plotter recorded separate temporal resolution
signals analogous to the field monitors RUP-1 and MKS-01; in case of the first two
schemes a wide enveloping maximum was recorded due to the inertia of measuring
systems. The RF emission had a sporadic character; the same character was noted
when detecting the neutron flows in the first years of cold nuclear fusion study.


5. Probable mechanism

The generation of tritium while neutron flows are absent suggests that cold nuclear
fusion occurs through a tritium channel as has been assumed earlier.4 The nonuniform formation of tritium within the sample interior after deformation testifies that
the process of cold nuclear fusion occurs only in a surface layer. The same conclusion was also made in the review of early papers.5 The presence of electromagnetic
radiation also confirms this conclusion, since the radio waves can be radiated only
from near surface layers of metallic materials.

RF emission was detected only during the saturation of titanium alloy samples
by deuterium, while during the saturation by conventional hydrogen it was not
detected. We presume that the appearance of tritium in the samples where RF
emission was detected points to the occurrence of cold nuclear fusion.

We suggest that the most probable mechanism of the occurrence of RF emission,
which accompanies cold nuclear fusion, is the interaction of products of nuclear
reaction 2D + 2D → 1p+ + 3T+ + E(4.03 Mev),
tritium and proton, with the metallic matrix. The movement of charged particles in
the periodic field of the crystal lattice can result in the occurrence of RF emission.
Unfortunately, we did not find articles about measurements of radiation within the
range of radio frequencies when charged particles pass through the metallic matrix.
The registration of such radiation can become indirect proof of the cold nuclear
fusion occurrence along the tritium channel.


6. Discussion

Some authors account for the presence of tritium by the fact that its small amount
is present in deuterium or in the metal under study. The preliminary preparation of
samples in our experiments excluded the presence of tritium in the metal before its
saturation by deuterium. During preliminary vacuum annealing up to T = 1200 ◦C
for 1 h, the sample is completely clean from all hydrogen isotopes

During the second stage of our work, we were not engaged in measurements of
tritium. Now, we are trying to carry out new experiments to produce a significant
amount of tritium. Only after successful termination of this experiment will we
plan to start the measurement of heat effects

The assumptions that have been presented in this work are not of a revolutionary nature. For their confirmation it is no need to create new physics. Simply
this physics differs from the physics of hot nuclear fusion. In the former case, the
processes occur in plasma. Cold nuclear fusion occurs in hard metal, under temperatures below 1000 ◦C.


7. CONCLUSIONS

(1) During successive three-step compression of preliminarily deuterium saturated VT9 alloy samples, an emission has been detected in the third stage of deformation,
which is not a flow of neutrons or gamma quanta.
(2) In the surface layer of the samples for which the emission was detected, the concentration of tritium exceeded the background level by 3–7 times.
(3) The occurrence of emission and excess tritium concentration are associated with
a specific structure of the samples, and observed only in the coarse-grained grosslamellar structure.
(4) During the saturation of VT-9 alloy samples by deuterium, an electromagnetic
emission has been detected in the range of radio frequencies. Evidently, it was
a pulse emission in the range of radio frequencies that was detected as neutrons
during cold nuclear fusion by neutron monitors in early works.


References

1. D. D. Afonichev and M. A. Murzinova, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 28(9), 1005–1010
(2003).
2. O. A. Kaibyshev, Superplasticity of Alloys, Intermetallides and Ceramics (SpringerVerlag, Berlin, 1992, 317 pp).
3. Hydrogen in Metals, vol. 1, ed. G. Alefeld and I. V¨olkl (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg,
NY, 1978).
4. BARC Stadies in Cold Fusion, eds. P. K. Iengar and M. Srinivasan (Bhabha Atomic
Research Center, BARC 1500, Trombay, Bombay, India, November 1989).
5. V. A. Tsarev, Sov. Phys. Usp., 35, 842 (1992).

