1. Introduction

The aim of the present paper is to report recent results obtained in a new ten­
electrochemical cell experiment carried out in order to confirm the previous results (1-2) and 
try to understand the key role of some experimental parameters, if any, in triggering the cold 
fusion events. 

Our approach to the cold fusion experimentation was and still is to search time­
correlation among independent measured parameters, both to give a stronger evidence that we 
are not dealing with instrumental artifacts and to obtain useful information on the related 
mechanisms. Due to a permanent skepticism of a part of the scientific community, we believe 
useful that the people still working on this field must continue to show that a big amount of 
reliable experimental data give results which are not explained with conventional theoretical 
approaches and therefore we are concerned in a new frontier of the scientific knowledge. 

The experiment was designed to detect: a) excess heat; b) loading factor by in situ 
measurement of the cathode displacement; c) nuclear products: neutrons, tritium in the 
electrolytic solution and in the recombined heavy water, y-ray; d) effect of the palladium 
electrode preparation. The main difference between the present experiment and the previous 
one (2), is constituted by excess heat measurements, a more efficient neutron counting system 
based on the pulse shape discrimination and in situ measurement of the cathode swelling due 
to the absorption of the electrochemically generated deuterium. 


2. Experimental

We shall only report those parts of the our experimental set-up and procedures which 
have been added with respect to the previous experiments which can be found in the literature 
(2). Just to facilitate the understanding, we can summarize the features of the experiment as 
follows: 
• Ten egual cells connected in series operating in galvanostatic conditions;
• The only difference among them is in the preparation and/or shape and/or dimensions of the
Pd cathode;
• All the cells are placed in a torus-shaped thermostated bath at (24.5 ± 0.1) °C. They are
simmetrically located in the bath. Five K-type thermocouples are placed along the torus.
Room temperature is kept constant at (20 ±1) °C;
• Before to fill the cells with the solution, a D2 stream was maintained for some time;
• All the cells have a separate gas recombiner for tritium (T) monitoring in the gases;
• All the cells are provided with a device to maintain a constant level of solution by adding
D20 when consumed;
• Each cell is monitored for:
- Temperature of the cathode
- Temperature of the solution
- Voltage of the cell
- T in solution and in gas phase externally recombined
• Two cells out of ten have a displacement transducer to monitor the cathode swelling during
D-loading;
• One 3He proportional counter for neutron detection is placed in the centre of the torus and
two y-ray detectors (Nal and HPGe) are properly located around the bath.

2.1 Excess heat Measurements :
Because our torus-shaped multicell apparatus is not a calorimeter, but it is an 
isothermal device, accurately thermostated, which allows to keep at constant temperature the 
external wall of each of the ten electrochemical cells, the variation cell to cell of the heat flux 
crossing each glass tube only depends from the temperature of the electrolyte solution since 
all the parameters influencing the heat transport (electrolytic solution and its volume, 
geometry of the cell and materials by which it is made of, exchange surface area, etc.) are 
equal for all the cells. Thus, at a fixed input power imposed to the cell, a stationary thermal 
gradient will be established between the inner solution and the thermostated bath. If the 
stationary values of the temperature of the electrolyte solution are reported as a function of the 
respective input power applied to the cell, we have a calibration curve which provides the 
excess heat data when well-defined deviations from it occur during the real experiment
 
2.1.1 Calibration procedure: 
Few points are necessary to explain the procedure we adopted in making the 
calibration curves 
- Two cells (by dimensions, shape, materials, etc.) equal to those used in the experiment
have been calibrated in the same experimental arrangement previously described;
- Two types of calibration for each cell were carried out both in LiOD + D20 solution:
• Thermal (by an electric heater);
• Electrochemical (as in the experiment) by using gold plated Pd cathodes. Each electrode
was carefully controlled by SEM microprobe mapping of Pd to be sure that Pd was not
detected;
• In both the cases each stationary temperature of LiOD solution at fixed input power was kept
as a point of the respective calibration curve;
• It can be shown that the stationary temperature at constant input power does not depend on
the electrode mass. This can influence the time constant only. Thus, the calibration curve
obtained is valid throughout our system.

The choice of this procedure was based on the fundamental concept that, in absence of 
processes other than the D20 electrolysis, the two calibration curves must be found 
superimposed due to equality: 
[IYI x llh = [(IYI-Y0) x Ile, 
where IYI, I and Y0 are, respectively, the voltage at Joule heater or electrode leads, the current 
crossing the respective systems and the thermoneutral voltage given by -Mf0 /D20,1)/2:F' 
being Mf0 /D20,1) and :F', respectively, the enthalpy of formation of liquid D20 and the 
Faraday's constant. Y0 has been taken equal to 1.5367 Y(3). The subscripts h and e stand for, 
respectively, by-heater and electrochemical calibrations. Furthermore, we used as blank for 
the calibrations heavy water solutions and Pd gold-plated cathodes because we believe that 
both these conditions allow to be closer to the real experimental situation. In fact, the use of 
light water solution instead of the heavy water solution as blank, though so widely adopted to 
guarantee the reliability of the cold fusion findings, is quite imprecise from the calorimetric 
point of view because heat capacity and thermal conductivity of the solution, enthalpy of 
vaporization of D20 as well as thermal conductivity of H2 and D2 are all appreciably 
different. The gold-plating of Pd cathode avoids the process: 
while the processes 
and/or 
Dads ➔ Dbulk (Pd) 
remain the same as in the case of Pd only. The ads subscript stands for the chemisorbed 
status of the deuterium atom onto the cathode surface. Obviously, if the process 2 is 
completely forbidden, we can be sure that neither cold fusion phenomena nor chemical 
process occur. 

Figure 1 shows some stationary steps used to build the calibration curves by making 
use of both an electric heater (Fig. lA and lB) and the electrolysis (Fig. l C and 1D). Figures 
l B and 1 D display a portion corresponding to a single step of the respective A and C curves.

2.1.2 Electrodes and cells:
Gold-plated Pd cathodes were prepared starting from Johnson & Mattey 6 mm 
diameter rod, cut in 25 mm long pieces, machined at one end for encasing the thermocouple 
and then accurately polished before the electrochemical plating. The gold layer thickness was
about 4 µm. To improve the electrical contact also the shield of the all K-type thermocouples 
used in this experiment was gold plated. Since the shields are electrically insulated from the 
inner thermoelements, they also work as current leads for the cathodes. To obtain this, the 
shields were soldered on the top of each cathode. The space around the junction 
cathode/thermocouple were filled with epoxy resin and then covered by a piece of 
thermoplastic tube to avoid the direct contact with the alkaline solution. All the materials used 
were tested for long time to be inert in LiOD alkaline solutions.

Figure 1. Typical trends of the temperature of the LiOD solution vs input power in the 
thermochemical and electrochemical calibration mode

Anode and cell geometry and dimensions were given elsewhere (2). Here it is just sufficient 
to mention the characteristic of the heater. This was a 50 W resistor obtained by winding 
Kamal wire on a capillary alumina tube. The whole diameter was 3.2 mm. It was placed in a 
NMR-type test tube filled with silicon oil and inserted in the proper hole of the cell teflon cap. 

2.2 Furber details on the electrolytic cells :
2.2.1 Cathode swelling measurement: 
Two cells out of ten were modified in the bottom part to allow the insertion of a L VDT 
(Linear Voltage Displacement Transducer) by Penny+Gilles, U.K. mod.1354. This kind of 
transducers have an infinite resolution and ·the sensitivity is given better than 1 mV/µm 
practically depending on both the electronics of the d.c. power supply and voltmeter used for 
the readings. By our apparatuses, we can measure displacements greater than 0.1 µm and up 
to 5 mm in both the directions. The L VDT was placed in a teflon cylinder fitted to the bottom 
of the glass cell. To seal the L VDT from the alkaline solution and to allow the spring loaded 
probe to move free, a very thin plastic membrane was used. Due to the type of assembly, we 
can measure the electrode swelling only in the z-axis (major dimension) direction. The 
voltages were read by two of the 60 analogic input channels of the data logger and directly 
converted in µm according to the linear calibration curves previously found. L VDT data as 
well as the other ones coming from the entire apparatus are transferred through the data logger 
to a Macintosh II f x running on a home-made acquisition program written on Lab VIEW 2.1 
(National Instruments, Austin, TX).

2.2.2 Cathodes:
The ten Pd cathodes used were prepared in different ways as reported in Table I 
below. The cathode and thermocouple assembly was done by the same procedure as reported 
in section 2.1.2. 

2.2.3 Electrolytic solution:
It was a 0.2 M LiOD solution prepared in the usual way by using D2O (Fluorochem 
Ltd., England) at 99.91 wt% in the isotopic content. The nominal T activity was 60 nCi/kg 
corresponding to 147 dpm/ml. In the first part of the experiment D2O at higher T content (254 
dpm/ml) was used. 

The Li concentration in the electrolytic solution of each cell was systematically 
analysed during the experiment by plasma absorption spectroscopy. If the Li concentration 
was found less than the initial value, this was restored by a proper addition of a more 
concentrated LiOD solution. Li concentration generally decreases much more at high current 
densities due to the increased action of the evolving gases in carrying microbubbles of 
solution out of the cell and, as it will show in the results section, it decreases also because of 
the absorption by the Pd cathode. 

2.3 Nuclear measurements :
2.3.1 Neutron detection: 
With respect to the previous experiments (1-2), we improved our counting system by 
storing the analog signals from 3He proportional counter and off-line discrimination based on 
the characteristic pulse shape produced by a thermalized neutron interacting with 3He gas. 

According to the scheme reported in Fig. 2, the logic signal from the neutron counter, 
through the look-at-me channel of the data logger, drew the computer to read the digitized 
pulse shape produced by the oscilloscope in 1024 byte string. The minimum interval of time 
between two acquired shapes was determined by the time resolution of the look-at-me channel 
which was 2 ms. Each stored shape was written together the event date in the format dd-mm­
yy:hh-mm-ss.sss. The whole stored file of each run was constituted by an appended binary 
text file which can be segmented and converted in the voltage vs time original curves by a 
suitable home-made Lab VIEW program. 

Figure 2. Scheme of the dated pulse shape acquisition from the 3He neutron counter 

The pulse shape associated to a thennalized neutron displays a negative voltage value 
without any positive component all along its length (see Fig 3A of ref.2) while a pulse 
produced by spurious electromagnetic signals picked-up by the counter shows both positive 
and negative values (see Fig. 3B of ref.2). Due to the characteristics of the signals, a suitable 
filter has been put in the off-line analysis. The program labels as neutrons only the events that 
go through the filter. Funher check of the reliability of the adopted procedure was done. We 
calculated by integration of each filtered pulse the corresponding collected charge and, for 
each run, a spectrum was obtained (see Fig.3) which was always in agreement with the 
spectrum obtained by the calibration with an Am-Be source. 

Figure 3. Pulse charge spectrum as given by the filtered neutron signals in a typical run. The 
peak value is at= 765 keV as obtained when calibrating with Am-Be source 

For each run the total counting and the counting rate were given only by filtered 
signals. The dating of the signals allowed to perform the counting choosing the proper time 
gate. 

The signals which did not pass through the filter were stored in a separate file for 
further analyses. In fact, there are scattered evidences (2,4) that the electrochemical system 
itself could be source of electromagnetic signals. We are looking for some correlations, for 
instance, between the frequency of those spurious signals and applied current density.
 
2.3.2 Tritium measurements:
The sampling for the tritium analysis both in the solution and in recombined gases was 
done at fixed values of the electrical charge passed through the cells. This is necessary to 
facilitate the control of the tritium mass balance. The external catalytic recombiner is 
constituted by porous Pt supported on alumina tube and heated at 400 °C. The D20 
recombined vapours are condensed on a water-cooled glass surf ace. 

The tritium measurements were carried out by the procedure already reponed (2). 

2.3.3 y measurements:
Seven energy windows of the HPGe y detector spectrum spanning between 350 ke V 
and 2.8 Me V were monitored during the experiment. Lower energy windows were centered 
in the region where the emissions from the Pd nuclei levels occur due to the Coulomb 
excitation induced by 3.0 Me V protons generated in the d + d reaction. Energy window 
around 2.204 MeV was used to monitor the natural background due to 214Bi. A window
around 2.224 Me V was used to monitor the y emitted in the radiative capture of neutron by 
proton. 

Seven energy windows of the Nal y detector spectrum spanning between 2.1 and 27.0 
Me V were at the same time monitored. The lower energy window was again used to detect 
the radiative capture reaction, an energy window around 2.6 Me V was set to measure the 
natural background, an energy window around 23.8 MeV to monitor the d(d,y) 4He reaction. 


3. RESULTS and DISCUSSION

3.1 Excess heat :
3.1.1 Calibration curves:
Figure 4 shows sequences of steady-states of the solution temperature when the 
heating occurred by the heater (h) or electrolysis (e) mode. The input power values, Ip, were 
calculated in both the cases according to the left and right side, respectively, of Eqn. 1. The 
calibrations were made at the same time on two identical cells containing, as shown before, 
gold-plated cathodes likely prepared in the same way. After each calibration the LiOD solution 
was analysed for the Li content and replaced in the cells by a fresh one having same volume 
and concentration. Figure 4 clearly shows that the calibration curve obtained in the 
electrolysis mode on cell #2 is quite anomalous with respect to the other calibrations which 
are satisfactorily represented by the best fitting line: 
Ts = (25.3 ± 0.1) + (0.477 ± 0.002) Ip 
which was then assumed to evaluate the behaviour of all the cells during the ten-cells 
experiment. 

To try for an explanation, at the end of the calibration measurements, we examined by 
SEM microprobe mapping the surfaces of both the cathodes to check the status of the gold 
layer. In the cathode of cell #2, we found two zones along the lateral surface of the cylinder 
clearly not covered by gold. The molar Li concentration, [Li], was found 0.184 and 0.075, 
respectively, for the cells labeled #1 and #2. If we compare these values with the initial value 
of 0.187 (equal for both the cells), changes are found in the Li concentration equal to -1.6% 
and -59.9%, respectively. Assuming that all the Li concentration change,  [Li] depends on 
the reduction and bulk-diffusion into the cathode, the final composition of the cathode has to 
be considered equal to MLi]VoMpd/l000Wc = 0.05, i.e., Pd.Li0_05, being Vo= volume of 
LiOD solution = 35 ml, Mpd = atomic weight of Pd and W c = weight of the cathode of cell #2 
= 8.55 g. Therefore, the decrease of [Li] is consistent both with the surface microprobe 
analysis and with the well-known fact that at high current densities, that is, high cathodic 
overvoltages, alkaline metals can be reduced in acqueous solution, even if, in an unstable 
state, except for in the case where a concurrent process does exist. 

Figure 4. Thermal and electrochemical calibration curves obtained for two identical cells.The 
error bar length is comparable with the dimension of the points 

By interstitial diffusion and a favourable chemical potential gradient, as in the case of 
hydrogen and its isotopes, Li penetrates into the Pd bulk producing solid solutions without 
going back into the aqueous solution because of the reaction with water. The difference 
observed in the case of cell #2 roughly means that the solution can be, for instance, heated at 
40 °C by using an input power equal to == 77% of that one necessary if the Pd cathode did not 
absorbe deuterium (cell #1). In terms of specific excess power, this  eans 10 W/cm3 about if 
we consider all the volume of the cathode #2 subjected to deuterium absorption. 

If we consider the right term of eqn.1, we realize that this is representative of a 
particular aspect of a more general treatment. In fact, only one electrochemical process was 
there considered (D20 electrolysis) and no chemical process. In general, we would have to 
write the eqn. 1 in the form: 
where the summations run over the all possible electrochemical and chemical processes. In 
eqn. 5, vi is the reaction rate of the i-th chemical reaction which could be also current
dependenL Obviously, if the input power axis of the calibration plot is recalculated by taking 
into account the right-side of eqn. 5, the slope of the curve can change and, in principle, the 
equality with the left-side term should be satisfied. All the tentatives made so far to lower, 
through eqn. 5, the slope of the electrochemical calibration curve of cell #2, plotted on Fig. 4, 
were unsuccessful. Work is still in progress to improve this calculation.
 
3.1.2 Ten-cell experiment:
Concerning the experiment which started on May 6, 1991 and lasted 50 days 
approximately, we show on Figure 5 two quite different trends of the excess heat as recorded 
throughout the experiment. 

Figure 5. Specific heat power excess for cells #1 and #9 and applied current profile 
throughout the experiment

To compare correctly the excess heat data for all the electrodes, we used to normalize 
the excess heat power with respect to the cathode weight instead of its volume being this, for 
certain electrodes, difficult to measure due to their irregular shape. The applied current (all the 
cells are connected in series) is reported on the right ordinate of fig. 5. We can see that cell #1 
does not show throughout the experiment appreciable excess heat values and they are not 
current dependent. A very different behaviour is shown by cell #9 where the excess heat has 
been found above any reasonable experimental error and the correlation with the current 
seems to be very close. 

Figure 6 gives a bird-view, for all the cells, of the specific excess power results as function 
of the applied current density. We divided the curves of figure 6 in three categories chosen 
according to the preparation of the cathodes, as reported in Table I. We can focus our 
attention to some points emerging from inspection of fig. 6. These are: 
- Except for cells #1, #3 and, for opposite reasons (see below), #8, all the cells show a
threshold in the current density which is located around 100 mA/cm2;
- While cell #1 and #3, as already mentioned, did not give any excess heat whichever was the
current density, cell #8 started to produce excess heat at a lower current density value,
below 50 mA/cm2. This could be consistent with the fact that the whole cathodic surface
area was not equal to the calculated value, given by mt0(h + 0/4), but, reasonably, it was
less than that value because of the partial shielding of the innermost wires toward the
electrolytic solution, caused by the outermost wires. n, 0 and h are, respectively. the 
number of the wires, their diameter and length (see Table I). A similar reasoning could be 
done for cell #7 due to a possible not precise evaluation of the whole cathodic surface area;

Figure 6. Trend of the specific excess power vs current density as found for the ten cells. Cell 
#3 has not be reponed because its trend is very similar to cell #1 (see Table II) 

- The cathodes, in categories SINTERED and 0 6mm RODS, can be considered sufficiently
comparable among them since at least the shape, dimensions and starting materials are in
common for the cathodes belonging to the same category;
- By comparing the categories, it clearly appears that the cathodes made of 6 mm diameter
rods show the lowest power excess but there is not a significant difference between as
received and quenched cathodes ;
- On going from the cathode #1 to cathode #8, we pass from a practically undislocated
material to highly dislocated one, whereas, in .the SINTERED category, the concentration
and distribution of dislocations probably remains unaffected by the type of preparation. In
fact, it is reasonable that the cathodes maintain the same propenies of the grains of the
starting powder of the Pd sponge which is highly dislocated, as expected by itself nature;
- It is interesting to observe the very unlike behaviour between the two RFHQ cathodes (#6
and #9) which were different only by diameter. We believe that this has to be connected to
the dynamics of the high compressive stress which is established in the rod in the direction
from the surface toward the bulk when fast cooling occurs. Because the rate at which
cooling proceeds into the bulk, all the other conditions fixed, depends on the diameter, the
magnitude of the compressive stress, which can dislocate the rod in an ordered way, 
becomes consequently a function of the diameter. 

In Table II below it is reported the specific integral excess heat as calculated for all the 
cells. 

Figure 7. Specific power excess dependence on the current density compared with data in 
Ref. 5
 
Though our slope is less steep than the slope found by F.&P., it is important to observe that 
both the trends are linear and the difference in the slope and intercept can be reasonably 
attributed to the nature of the cathode. 

3.2 Cathode swelling measurements :
Before to show some preliminary results of cathode swelling measurements, 
performed in order to obtain in situ the loading factor [D/Pd], let us consider briefly some 
basic points related to this kind of measurements. According to the literature (6-7), in an 
unstrained Pd specimen, Di absorption produces a relative swelling, AV N, given by: 
AV N = 3 M../L = (0.20 ± 0.01)[0/Pd] 
Due to the fee structure of Pd, the swelling is an isotropic process producing the same relative 
elongation, AL/L, along each of the x,y,z axis. Probably, only cathode #1 is in this quite­
ideal situation due to the particular heat treatment that allowed it to loose all the internal 
stresses of the material reaching the state of internal thermodynamic equilibrium. In a cold­
drawn rod having diameter 0: 
AV N = (Ax/x) + (Ay/y) + (Aziz) = 2(A0/0) + (A'Z/z) 
due to the fact that there is a tensile strain along z-axis and compressive strain on the x,y 
plane. In this case, we cannot use the above relationship 6 for determining [D/Pd]. In a 
sintered specimen, eqn. 6 is still approximately satisfied but it is necessary to consider that the 
expected expansion, due to the deuterium absorption, occurs for a certain fraction, 6, in the 
free volume, VP' of the pores. Thus, the eqri. 6 becomes:
(AV- 6V p)N = 3 ALmea.JL 
where V p = W s(PPd - p5)/PsPPd· W s and Ps are, respectively, the weight and density of the 
sample s. In this case, the measured expansion, ALmeas• allows to measure 6 by eqn. 8 
through eqn . 6 as: 
6 = {0.20 [D/Pd] - 3 ALmeaJLHl/(1 - 0] 
if at least one [D/Pd] value is known and f = Ps / PPd . 

In our experiment, we measure the expansion along the major axis of the cathode, that 
is, ALmeasfL (#4-sintered) and Aziz (#3-06mm rod as received). In figure 8, we repon the 
recordings of the cathode swelling and the electrode temperature for the two cells equipped 
with the L VDT at the beginning of the experiment when, before to fill the cells with the 
electrolyte solution, a stream of D2(g) was allowed to circulate in the cells for conditioning the 
Pd cathodes. As it was already found (2,8), the response to the D2(g) exposure of the 
sintered cathode was completely different with respect to the rod and, as it will be shown, this 
difference will continue throughout the experiment. 

Figure 8. Behaviour of the cathodes monitored by the L VDTs when exposed both to D2 
stream, at atmospheric pressure, and D2 electrochemically generated. Temperature 
of the cathodes is also shown 

As shown in fig. 8, in the same experimental conditions, the swelling of the sintered cathode 
#4 was about 70 times greater than the swelling of the cathode #3. This could be easily 
explained by considering the respective porosity of the two materials which allows to the gas, 
in the case of the sintered cathode, to be in contact with a larger surface. Thermogravimetric 
measurements (9), carried out on sintered specimens, like #4, showed that at 101.3 kPa of 
D2(g) and at room temperature, the weight gain was such that an equilibrium [D/Pd] value of 
0.67, as expected, was reached in a time interval of about 20 min which is comparable with 
that reported on fig. 8. Therefore, we can associate the &meast'L to [D/Pd] and, through eqn.
9, we can calculate b = 0.114. This means that at least 11 % of the expected swelling does not 
contribute to expand the cathode, provided that its density is assumed isotropic. Due to the 
unidirectional pressing applied in the preparation and subsequent short sintering, the density 
could be higher along the z-direction increasing f in the eqn. 9 and, accordingly, the value of 
o. Previous calculations (8) made on the integration of the temperature vs time curve were and
still are in satisfactory agreement with the heat expected to be produced by the exothermic 
reaction which yields [D/Pd] = 0.67 producing. 

In fig. 8 the behaviour of the cathode just after the beginning of the electrolysis at 10 
rnA/cm2 is also reported. The L VDT of cathode #4 did not detect any appreciable variation 
while cathode #3 L VDT showed a well-defined increasing trend which continued as ·shown in 
figure 9 below. 

Figure 9. Behaviour of cathodes #3 and #4 observed in a long step-changing current density 
profile 

If we take into account the different AL ordinates of the two plots above, we realize 
that the cathode #4 swelling was practically independent from the current density, maintaining 
quite constant the value which was reached during the exposure to D2(g) stream. For cathode 
#3, AL was found to be strictly current density dependent. We observed that to maintain a 
certain swelling value it was necessary to continue to increase the current density otherwise a 
contraction of the cathode occurred. 

Though the dilatation measurements did not allow us to obtain an absolute value of 
[D/Pd], we believe the relative changes with respect to the current density are very interesting, 
when compared with the very low changes observed, simultaneously, on the sintered 
cathode. In fact, these findings go in the direction of our precedent work (10), based on the 
assumption that [D/Pd] values out far from the thermodynamic equilibrium can be achieved if 
some structural and morphological conditions are present in the material. Particular structured 
domains, where the continuity of the chemical potential does exist, could be sites where high 
[D/Pd] values might be reached because of the effect of high local current densities on the 
low-ionic conductor PdDx. This effect, as shown in literature (10), increases with the ionic 
transport number. To make this phenomenon macroscopically evident, it is necessary to have 
in the material a high concentration of large ionic-conductor domains satisfying particular 
structural arrangements able to set, locally, very high current densities. Due to the above 
considerations, we can only evaluate the lowest values of [D/Pd] for both the cathodes #3 and 
#4 which are, respectively, 0.26 (if eqn. 6 is calculated at the maximum measured value of 
M., see Fig. 9) and 0.67. In this context, the respective excess heat data of Table II could be 
considered consistent. 

3.3 Nuclear Measurements :
3.3.1 Tritium measurements :
As mentioned in the experimental section, we carried out systematically (roughly at 
fixed electrical charge passed through the ten-cell system) tritium measurements by 1 ml 
sampling both in each cell and in the respective catalytic recombinator. In figure 10, the trends
vs the integral charge passed both for tritium in solution and in recombined heavy water are 
given. The plots reported are considered typical and they refer to cells #1, #10 and #8, 
respectively, one for each category of cathodes. Detailed information on the procedure used to 
evaluate the tritium mass balance is reported elesewhere (2). Here it is sufficient to point out 
that the shape of the trends is due to the mixing, at the point marked by the arrow, of a new 
heavy water feed, at lower T content, [T]0 t , with the solution at higher T content, [T]0 h: In
fact, the final T enrichment was always within the expected enrichments from== 2[T]0 t to ==
2[T]0 fa. , roughly. As a consequence of this, the trends for the recombined gases were
influenced accordingly. However, no significant evidence of T excess was found throughout 
the experiment in any of the ten cells.  

Figure l 0. Typical tritium activity as found in solution and in recombined gases for three 
cells. Abscissa is quoted as (JI dt)/F where Fis the Faraday's constant. Arrows 
show the heavy water refilling from a new batch at lower T content 

From data like those reported in fig. 10, it is possible to calculate the enrichment factor 
defined as the ratio, at a certain charge passed, between the tritium concentration in the 
solution and tritium concentration in the gas phase, i.e., aE = [T]801/[T]gas· The knowledge
of this term is important to evaluate, after prolonged electrolysis, the final content of T, [T]r, 
in a D2O electrolytic solution having an initial concentration of tritium [T]0• In fact, as it can
be shown (11), [T]r== aE (T]0
• 
Figure 11 shows a typical trend of the enrichment factor for cell #9 throughout the 
experiment. 

Figure 11. Typical trend of the enrichment factor. Here cell #9 is reported 
It is important to observe that throughout this long experiment, aE was found 
practically constant. Some authors reported (13) different results and explained the variations 
of the enrichment factor as due to co-deposition onto the cathode surface of impurities which 
change the nature of the electrode/electrolyte interface and, consequently, the relative rate of 
the charge transfer of the hydrogen isotopes. 

The sensitivity of our measurements to detect an anomalous tritium content on the 
sample can be estimated to be of the order of 100 dpm/ml (effective value was 30 dpm/ml) 
that means a content of tritium of 109 atoms in one milliliter. By analysing the excess heat 
reported in table II, we can compute that all the cathodes, except to #1 and #3, have shown an 
integral excess heat of the order of 10 MJ. If this excess heat is to be attributed only to fusion 
reactions having tritium as final product, the number of reactions needed is of the order of 
1019_ Even considering that the process lasted for all the length of the experiment (50 days) 
one would expect in the solution+ gas phase a production of :::=1017 tritium atoms every day 
and, by taking into account the volume of the solution, 1015-1016 atoms of tritium would 
have been in 1 ml solution sampled. This number is 106-107 higher than the level of 
sensitivity of our measurements and it is hard to think an artifact responsible for a negative 
result. 

3.3.2. Neutron measurements:
The frequency of neutron counting was analysed using variable time integration 
intervals. In figure 12 the frequency as counts per hour is reported for all the runs. No 
evidence of any neutron signal different from background was found. 

Figure 12. Average neutron counts per hour measured in all the acquisition runs
 
The analysis has been repeated for each run with several choices of time integration 
intervals (from 10 minutes to 1 hour) by comparing each of the obtained distributions with the 
relative Poisson distribution expected according to the measured count mean value. In figure 
13 the result of this analysis is shown for one particular run which is representative of the 
results obtained in all the runs. The experimental data are shown as well as the expected 
values. These are reponed with an error bar indicating their possible variability when the 
mean value of the Poisson distribution is changed within the measured value of the standard 
deviation. In all the cases the mean value is compatible with the background value and the 
count distributions follow the statistics expected proving, in this way, the background nature 
of the neutrons detected. 

Figure 13. Frequency count of neutrons as observed in 542 intervals of ten minutes 
acquisitions and as expected in a Poisson distribution. The variability of the 
expected values obtained allowing the measured mean value to vary between µ-o 
=0.32 and µ+CJ= 0.37 counts/IO min. is also reponed. 

Being one cell (#3) operated for a cenain time with pulsed current, a special test has 
been made by analysing the time sequence of neutron counts with respect to the current value. 
No correlation has been found, being the count distributions during the l=IMax and I=O time 
intervals described by the same Poisson distribution with an acceptable statistical significance. 

According to the discussion at the end of the previous section 3.3.1 on the comparison 
between excess heat and nuclear products, a number of 10 19 reactions is needed again to 
explain the heat found with the only fusion reaction having neutron and 3He as final products. 

Under the same assumptions already made and taking into account the efficiency of 
the neutron counter a counting rate greater than 1010 times the normal background would 
have been detected. 

3.3.3y measurements:
Gamma spectra from HPGe and Nal (11) counters, respectively, in t_he energy ranges 
of 0.30 - 2.83 Me V and 2.0 - 27 .0 Me V, were sequentially acquired for living time intervals 
of eight minutes. For each measurement the integral count of selected energy windows 
reported in tables III and IV were stored. For the spectra of both counters an energy window 
was reserved to monitor natural background, being the e channel of the Ge counter centered 
on the energy of a y emitted by the 214Bi (a daughter radioisotope of 238U) and the b channel
of the Nal counter centered on the energy of y emitted by 208n (a daughter radioisotope of
232To). 

For each run the analysis of the measurements was made by checking the fluctuation of the 
ratio of the counts in a given channel against that of the background channel. In figures 14 
and 15 we report an example of measurements with Ge and Nal counters, respectively. The 
counting ratios fluctuate around the mean value. The upper dotted lines indicate the deviations 
from the mean of three times the maximum value of the error of the ratio on a single 
integration interval within the run. These levels can be considered as the threshold that 
indicates a statistically significant deviation. In all the measurements no significant deviation 
from background has been detected. 
a/e 
b/e 
d/e 
Figure 14. Ratio of the counts of different energy windows over natural background. Ge 
detector. a, b, c, etc. are the energy windows (see table IIO 
The sensitivity of the different channels to detect a possible fusion reaction is very different 
due to the several factors that affect the possibility to detect gammas of given energy coming 
from a fusion channel. Gammas of low energy 0.35 - 0.55 MeV are expected to be a signal of 
the reaction chain: 
d+d ➔ 3H+p , p+Pd ➔ p+Pd* , Pd* ➔ y+Pd 
Taking into account the reaction yield and the counter efficiency the threshold sensitivity was 
about 1011 fusion reaction in 3H+p channel in the time integration of eight minutes. 

Photons coming from the radiative capture of neutrons by protons of materials containing 
hydrogen are expected in the energy window centered around 2.22 MeV. 

Figure 15. Ratio of the counts of different energy windows over natural background. Nal 
detector. a, b, c, etc. are the energy windows (see table IV)
 
This spectrum channel is a monitor of the reaction chain 
d+d ➔ 3He+n , n+p ➔ d+-y 
The threshold sensitivity both for Ge and Nal counters was about 1()6 fusion reactions in the 
3He+n channel in a time interval of eight minutes. 

From the results shown in figure 6, by computing the power excess of different 
cathodes and taking into account the palladium mass, a maximum value of about 13 W is 
found. Considering fusion reactions in the two classical channels (p + T and n + 3He) as 
source of the power excess measured, a number of 1012 reactions per second are needed, that 
is 5x1014 if we consider that the phenomena lasted along all the eight minutes of the time 
interval integration. By comparing this value with the sensitivity threshold, we conclude that 
in the low energy window the sensitivity was not sufficient to detect the p + T channel 
through the y measurements. On the contrary, in the windows selected to monitor the y 
emitted by the radiative capture, the expected signal from n + 3He reaction was 108 times 
higher than the sensitivity. 

Gammas in the upper windows of the Nal spectrum would monitor the fusion channel 
d+d -> 4He+y (23.8 MeV) 
This reaction, on the contrary to the case in which the energy (and not only the momentum) is 
absorbed by the crystal lattice, does not release locally heat and should not give contribution 
to an observed excess heat generated in the cathode. The threshold sensitivity for this fusion 
channel was about 107 fusion reactions in the used integration time. To explain the heat 
excess measured in this experiment as generated by nuclear phenomena, a reaction not 
monitored by our instrumentation (for instance the 4He production with the energy absorbed 
locally by the lattice) must be called .

 
4. Conclusions 

The following conclusions can be drawn: 
- Excess heat and cathode swelling were found strongly dependent from the preparation of
the Pd cathodes;
- Sintered and bulk cathodes behave in different way with respect to the absorption of
deuterium as shown by the displacement measurements. In the case of bulk cathode, the
D/Pd ratio seems to be greatly influenced by the applied current density showing a real non­
equilibrium condition. The sintered cathode absorbs deuterium without any correlation with
the current density like in a state of thermodynamic equilibrium;
- The highest specific excess heat and power were found to be, respectively, 130 MJ/cm3 and
96W/cm3;
- Specific power excess displays a linear dependence on the applied current density with a
possible threshold effect according to the literature;
- From the double calibration procedure adopted (thermal and electrochemical) an intriguing
evidence arises which is, by itself, the most important feature of the cold fusion nature to
which a clear answer is still lacking;
- Though neutron, tritium and gamma measurements were taken throughout the experiment,
no statistically significant evidence of release of these nuclear products was found;
- Evaluation of the sensitivity of the respective nuclear measurements gives confidence th"c if
the energy were released through channels involving the generation of the monitored
nuclear products they would be detected at a statistically significant level;
- To explain the heat excess measured in this experiment as generated by nuclear phenomena,
a reaction not monitored by our instrumentation (for instance the 4He production with the
energy absorbed locally by the lattice) must be called;
- Also the findings here reported go into the direction of the scattered results still coming from
cold fusion experiments which even more require a complete set of independent parameters
to be controlled and nuclear products to be measured (4He for instance) both to exclude the
chemical nature of the heat generated and possible other sources of error.


5. Acknowledgements

Work was carried out with the financial support of the National Research Council 
(CNR), National Institute of Nuclear Physics (INFN-sezione Sanita) and Laboratory of 
Physics of the Istituto Superiore di Sanita, Roma. 

The first author wish to thank Prof. E. Cardarelli and P. Porta of the Department of 
Chemistry of the Universita "La Sapienza", Roma for their contribution in Plasma Absorption 
Spectroscopy analyses of lithium and XRD of palladium cathodes, respectively. He is also 
indebted with Dr. G.P. Bardi and D. Ferro both of the CNR-Centro di Tennodinamica 
Chi mica alle Alte Temperature for their support in making, respectively, TG measurements 
and SEM microprobe determinations. 

The authors wish to thank Prof. G. Balducci for his assistance in preparing this 
manuscript. 


6. References

I. D. Gozzi et al., Nuovo Cimento, 103A, 143 (1990)
2. D. Gozzi et al., Fusion Technology, 21 (1992) in press; AIP Conference Proceedings
228, Anomalous Nuclear Effects in Deuteriwn!Solid Systems, Provo, UT, October 22-
24, 1990 (Eds. S. Jones, F. Scaramuzzi and D.Worledge), American Institute of Physics
(New York) 1991, p. 481-493
3. J. Balej and J. Divisek, J.Electroanal.Chem., 278 (1989) 85
4. G.H. Lin, R.C. Kainthla, N.J.C. Packham and J. O'M. Bockris, J. Electroanal. Chem.
280, 207 (1990)
5. M. Fleishmann and S. Pons, J.Electroanal.Chem., 287 (1990) 293
6. H. Peisl, in Hydrogen in Metals vol. I, ch.3, edited by G. Alefeld and J. Volkl , Springer­
Verlag (1978)
7. F.A. Lewis, Palladium Hydrogen System, Ac. Press (1967)
8. D. Gozzi et al., unpublished results
9. G.P. Bardi and D. Gozzi, paper in preparation
10. M. Tomellini and D. Gozzi, J. Mat. Science Lett. 9,836 (1990)
11. S.K. Malhotra, M.S. Krishnan and-H.K. Sadhukhan, "Material Balance of Tritium in
Electrolysis of Heavy Water," P.K. Iyengar & M. Srinivasan (Eds.), BARC Studies on
Cold Fusion (April-September 1989), Report BARC-1500 (1989)
12. D.E. Williams et al., Nature 342 (1989) 375; Conf. Proc. 24 of the Societa Italiana di
Fisica, Understanding Cold Fusion Phenomena, Varenna, September 15-16, 1989, (Eds.
by R.A. Ricci, F. De Marco and E. Sindoni)
