I. Introduction

A review of possible stimulation mechanisms of LENR (low energy nuclear reaction)
is presented in [1, 2, 3]. We have concluded that transmutation of nuclei at low energies
and excess heat is possible in the framework of the known fundamental physical laws, the
universal cooperative resonance synchronization principle [1], and different enhancement
mechanisms of reaction processes [2]. The superlow energy of external fields, the
excitation, and ionization of atoms may play the role of a trigger for LENR. Superlow
energy of external fields may stimulate LENR [3]. We give strong arguments that the
cooperative resonance synchronization mechanisms are responsible for explanation of
how the electron volt world can influence the nuclear mega electron volt world.

Nuclear physicists are absolutely sure that this cannot happen. Almost all nuclear
experiments were carried out in conditions when colliding particles interacted with the
nuclear targets which represented a gas or a solid body. The nuclei of the target are in the
neutral atoms surrounded by orbital electrons. All existing experimental data under such
conditions teach us that nuclear low energy transmutations are NOT OBSERVED due to
the Coulomb barrier.

LENR with transmutation of nuclei occurs in different conditions and different
processes but these processes have common properties: interacting nuclei are in the
ionized atoms or completely without electrons (bare nuclei). Therefore, LENR with bare
nuclei and nuclei in ionized atoms demonstrated drastically different properties in
comparison with nuclei in neutral atoms [2].

 LENRs take places in open systems in which all frequencies and phases are
coordinated, according to the universal cooperative resonance synchronization
principle. Poor reproducibility of experimental results and extreme difficulties of
their interpretation in the framework of modern standard theoretical physics are
the main problems of LENR.

Recent progress in both the directions is remarkable and this phenomenon is a key
point for further success in the corresponding fundamental and applied research. The
results of this research field can provide new ecologically pure sources of energy,
substances, and technologies.

The possibilities of inducing and controlling nuclear reactions at low temperatures and
pressures by using different low-energy fields and various physical and chemical
processes were discussed in [2, 3]. The aim of this paper is to present the results of
phenomenological quantization of atomic and nuclear masses and their differences which
can bring new possibilities for inducing and controlling nuclear reactions by atomic
processes and new interpretation of self-organization of the hierarchical systems in the
Universe.


HOW DO ATOMS and NUCLEI HAVE PERPETUAL MOTION?

II. Hydrogen Atom in Classical Mechanics

Is it possible to understand some properties of a hydrogen atom from classical
mechanics? The Hamiltonian for a hydrogen atom is

2
2
m vp p H 

+
2
2
m ve e

2
p e
e
r r


  . (1)

All notation is standard. The definition of the center of mass is

m r m r p p e e   0
 
, (2)

and the relative distance between electron and proton is

p e r r r  
  
. (3)

Equations (1) – (3) lead to the results

e
p
p e
m
r r
m m


 
,
p
e
p e
m
r r
m m
 

 
, (4)

2
2
2
v e H
r

 

, (5)

where

p e
p e
m m
m m
 

. (6)

The Hamiltonian (5) coincides with the Hamiltonian for the fictitious material point
with reduced mass  moving in the external field 2

e r/ . If we known the trajectory of
this fictitious particle r r t  ( )
 
then we can reconstruct the trajectories of electron and
proton using equations (4):

( ) e
p
p e
m
r t
m m



* r

(t), ( ) ( ) p
e
p e
m
r t r t
m m
 

 
. (7)

It is evident from (7) that the proton and electron move in the opposite directions
synchronously.

SO THE MOTIONS OF PROTONS, ELECTRONS and THEIR RELATIVE
MOTION OCCUR WITH EQUAL FREQUENCY

   p e   
. (8)

We can derive from (7) that

, P P P P p    e
   
, (9)

where P m v i i i 
 
. All three impulses are equal to each other in absolute value, which
means the equality of

( ) ( ) ( ) / D D D     p e h P    . (10)

 Therefore, the motions of proton and electron and their relative motion in the
hydrogen atom occur with the same FREQUENCY, IMPULSE (linear momentum)
and the de Broglie WAVELENGTH. All motions are synchronized and selfsustained. Therefore, the whole system -hydrogen atom is nondecomposable into
independent motions of proton and electron.


III. Quantization of Nuclear and Atomic Rest Masses

Almost all quantum mechanical models describe excited states of nuclei, atoms,
molecules, condensed matter,... neglecting the structure of the ground state of the
investigated systems. Therefore, we have very restricted information about the properties
of nuclei, atoms,... in their GROUND STATES. Note that the mutual influence of the
nucleon and electron spins (the superfine splitting), the Mossbauer effect, and so on are
well-known. The processes going in the surrounding matter of nuclei change the nuclear
moments and interactions of nucleons in nuclei.

 We proved that the motions of proton and electron in the hydrogen atom in the
ground state occur with the same frequency; therefore, their motions are
synchronized. The cooperation in motion of nucleons in nuclei and electrons in
atoms in their ground states is still an open problem. We formulate a very simple
and audacious working hypothesis: the nuclear and the corresponding atomic
processes must be considered as a unified entirely determined whole process. The
nucleons in nuclei and the electrons in atoms form open nondecomposable whole
systems in which all frequencies and phases of nucleons and electrons are
coordinated, according to the universal cooperative resonance synchronization
principle.

This hypothesis can be checked at least partly by investigation of the difference
between nuclear and atomic rest masses. We performed this analysis for the first time
(details in [4]).

The rest mass differences of atoms in the  -decay (single and double) and electron
capture (single and double) processes,  -decay, the differences between nuclear and
atomic rest masses are quantized by the formula [4] (in 2
MeV
c
)

1
1 2
2
0.0076293945 , 1,2,3, , 1,2,4,8 n
M n n
n
      . (11)

The accuracy of this formula (to seven significant digits) can be increased if we take into
account in our calculations all masses of atoms and nuclei (3177) to ten significant digits.
The experimental data were taken from P. Moller, et al.:
http://t2.lanl.gov/data/astro/molnix96/massd.html

1
1 2
2
0.0076293945312 , 1,2,3, , 1, 2, 4,8 n
M n n
n
     . (12)

Note that this quantization rule is justified for atoms and nuclei with different A,N and
Z , and the nuclei and atoms represent coherent synchronized systems — a complex of
coupled oscillators (resonators). This means that nucleons in nuclei and electrons in
atoms contain all necessary information about the structure of other nuclei and atoms.
This information is used and reproduced by simple rational relations, according to the
fundamental conservation law of energy. Remember that the following relations exist:

 
2 E Mc hv, (13)

where E is energy, h is the Planck constant, and v is frequency. Schrodinger wrote that
an interaction between microscopic physical objects is controlled by specific resonance
laws. According to these laws, any interaction in a microscopic hierarchic wave system
exhibits resonance character

0,
1
 

j
N
j
ij q v (14)

where i =1,2,3,... is a number of linear independent relations, ij q is the matrix consisting
of only integer numbers. Note that the binary relations from (14) can be rewritten in the
following way:

,
j
i
j
i
v
n
n
v  ( )  1,2,
i j
n n  3,..., (15)

In the classical case the resonance occurs only when the frequency of the external field is
close to the proper frequency of the system. The commonly accepted point of view is that
the integer numbers in resonance conditions (15) must be small numbers. In the case of
the argumental pendulum of D.B. Douboshenski and Ya.A. Duboshinsky [5] stable
oscillations are maintained by an efficient coupling between subsystems whose
frequencies can differ by two or more orders of magnitude. We come to the conclusion
that the integer numbers ni
and j
n can be any numbers:
9
110 .

We originated the universal cooperative resonance synchronization principle and this
principle is the consequence of the conservation of energy.

The cooperative resonance synchronized processes occur in the whole system:
cooperative processes including all nucleons and electrons in atoms; in condensed matter;
and in the surroundings when the resonance conditions (15) are fulfilled for all
subsystems and the whole system. In this case, the threshold energy Q can be drastically
decreased by internal energy of the whole system or even more — for example, the
electron capture by proton in nuclei can be accompanied by emission of internal binding
energy (which is forbidden in the case of the electron capture by free protons) — main
source of excess heat phenomenon in LENR. A half-life of neutron in nuclei changes
dramatically and depends on the isotopes.

As a final result, the nucleons in nuclei and electrons in atoms have commensurable
frequencies and the differences between those frequencies are responsible for creation of
beating modes. The phase velocity of standing beating waves can be extremely high;
therefore, the nucleons in nuclei and electrons in atoms should get information from each
other almost immediately (instantaneously) using phase velocity. Remember that the
beating (modulated) modes are responsible for radio and TV-broadcasting.
The universal cooperative resonance synchronization principle is responsible for the
unity of the nuclei and atoms. The quantization atomic and nuclear masses (12) with the
same quanta of mass confirmed our working hypothesis: atoms and nuclei are open
systems in which all motions are self-coordinated.


III. Conclusion

Note that the quantization rule (11, 12) is justified for atoms and nuclei with different
A N , and Z , and the nuclei and atoms represent coherent synchronized systems – a
complex of coupled oscillators (resonators). It means that nucleons in nuclei and
electrons in atoms contain all necessary information about the structure of other nuclei
and atoms. This information is used and reproduced by simple rational relations,
according to the fundamental conservation law of energy-momentum. We originated the
universal cooperative resonance synchronization principle and this principle is the
consequence of the conservation law of energy-momentum. As a final result, the
nucleons in nuclei and electrons in atoms have commensurable frequencies and the
differences between those frequencies are responsible for creation of beating modes. The
phase velocity of standing beating waves can be extremely high; therefore, all objects of
the Universe should get information from each other almost immediately
(instantaneously) using phase velocity [1, 3]. Remember that the beating (modulated)
modes are responsible for radio and TV-broadcasting.

Therefore, we come to understand the Mach principle. There are different
interpretations of the Mach principle. The Mach principle can be viewed as the entire
universe being altered by the changes in a single particle and vice versa.

 The universal cooperative resonance synchronization principle is responsible for
the very unity of the Universe.

We have shown only a very small part of our calculations by formula (11, 12) and the
corresponding comparison with experimental data for atomic and nuclear rest mass
differences. This formula produces a surprisingly high accuracy description of the
existing experimental data. Our incomplete tentative analysis has shown that the
quantization of rest mass differences demonstrate very interesting periodical properties in
the whole Mendeleev periodic table. We hope that it is possible to create an analog of the
Mendeleev periodic table describing atomic and nuclear properties of the atomic and
nuclear systems simultaneously.

We bring some arguments [1, 2] that the homology of atoms, molecules (in living
molecules too, including DNA) and crystal structures exists. So inter-atomic distances in
molecules, crystals and solid-state matter can be written in the following way:

1
2
e
n
d
n
  , (16)

where e =0.3324918 nm is the de Broglie electron wavelength in a hydrogen atom in the
ground state (  e p  in a hydrogen atom in the ground state) and   n n 1 2  1,2,3,.

In 1953 Schwartz [6] proposed considering the nuclear and the corresponding atomic
transitions as a unified process. This process contains the beta-decay which represents the
transition of nucleon from state to state with emission of electron and antineutrino, and
simultaneously the transition of atomic shell from the initial state to the final one. A
complete and strict solution of this problem is still needed.

We did the first step to consider the nuclear and atomic rest masses as unified
processes (coupled resonators) which led us to establish the corresponding
phenomenological quantization formula (11), and can bring new possibilities for inducing
and controlling nuclear reactions by atomic processes and new interpretation of selforganization of the hierarchial systems in the Universe including living cells.

LENR can be stimulated and controlled by superlow energy external fields. If
frequencies of an external field are commensurable with frequencies of nucleon and
electron motions, then we should have a resonance enhancement of LENR. Anomalies of
LENR in condensed matter (in plasma) and many anomalies in different branches in
science and technologies (for example, homoeopathy, influence of music in nature,
rhythms, nanostructures…) should be results of cooperative resonance synchronization
frequencies of subsystems with open system frequencies, with surrounding and external
field frequencies. In these cases threshold energy can be drastically decreased by internal
energy of the whole system — the systems are going to change their structures if more
stable systems result. Therefore, we have now real possibilities to stimulate and control
many anomalous phenomena including LOW ENERGY NUCLEAR REACTIONS and
even SUPER-CONDUCTIVITY [1].

We have in principle found a possible way to ACHIEVE SUPER-CONDUCTIVITY
AT ROOM TEMPERATURE [1].


References

[1] Gareev, F.A. In: FPB-98, Novosibirsk, June 1998, p. 92; Gareev, F.A.; G.F. Gareeva
In: Novosibirsk, July 2000, p.161; Gareev, F.A.; Zhidkova, I.E.; Ratis, Yu.L.
Preprint JINR P4-2004-68, Dubna, 2004 (in Russian).
[2] Gareev, F.A.; Zhidkova, I.E.; Ratis, Yu.L. In Proc. of ICCF11, Marseille: France: 31
October – 5 November, 2004, p.459; Gareev, F.A; Zhidkova, I.E. E-print arXiv nuclth/0505021 v1 8 May 2005; E-print arXiv nucl-th/0511092 v1 30 November 2005;
E-print arXiv nucl-th/0601015 v1 5 January 2006.
[3] Gareev, F.A; Zhidkova, I.E. In Proc. of ICCF12, November 27 – December 2, 2005,
Yokohama, Japan, in http://www.iscmns.org/iccf12/program.htm.
[4] Gareev, F.A.; Zhidkova, I.E. E-print arXiv nucl-th/0610002 30 Sep 2006;
arXiv:0708.0305[nucl-th] 2 Aug 2007.
[5] Doubochinski, D.B.; Duboshinsky, Ya.B. Dokladee Akademii Nauk SSSR, 204, N5,
1065 (1972).
136
[6] Schwartz, H.M. J. Chem. Phys. 21, p. 45, 19