1. Introduction

Humankind has an urgent requirement for abundant, inex-
pensive and clean energy. New sources are needed not only
to secure energy supplies for the future, but also to reduce
impacts of current sources, including global climate change
and degradation of water supplies. Cold fusion (now widely
referred to as low energy nuclear reaction, LENR) would, if
its benefits could be realized, meet human needs for a secure
and clean energy source for the foreseeable future.

LENR was announced in March 1989 by Dr. Martin
Fleischmann and Dr. Stanley Pons. Although it was rejected
by mainstream science within a year, it continued to be pur-
sued by many researchers worldwide. But because it is a pari-
ah science, few new scientists have been attracted to the field.
Many of the researchers who began their work soon after the
announcement are now leaving the field because of retire-
ment or health issues. The large volume of research records
developed over the past 30 years is at risk of being lost.

The LENR Research Documentation Initiative (LRDI) is
underway to mitigate this potential loss. Its main objective
is to help researchers make sure that their records are pre-
served and kept available for additional analysis and inter-
pretation as the LENR field continues to progress. The LRDI
began as a pilot project with Dr. Edmund Storms and now
includes 15 participants. Because the records have promise
of helping realize the benefits of LENR, they represent a vital
asset for humankind.


2. Records Documentation Procedure

Projects are set up under the LRDI umbrella for participating
investigators. A procedure has been developed to capture,
document and preserve the records (Figure 1). An LRDI proj-
ect is initiated by making contact with the researcher, review-
ing the objectives and procedure, encouraging participation,
establishing communications and arranging a site visit.

A professional resume (CV) is an important source of
information and is requested during the initial contact.
Research records are collected and interviews are conducted
during the site visit. Photos are also taken of the participant
and of the various records, which are also described individ-
ually with a cover memo. The interviews are recorded, tran-
scribed and similarly documented with a cover memo.

Figure 1. LRDI procedure.

Arrangements are also made during the visit for organizing
and preserving the records. After the visit, the documented
records and interview transcripts are reviewed, and a
research timeline is usually developed. A draft report is pre-
pared based on the memos and is submitted to the
researcher for review. It includes additional work that may
be performed after the report is submitted.

Projects
are
conducted
on
an
informal
basis.
Confidentiality is assured, and any results of a project are
reviewed with the researcher before being released in public
venues. Information covered by any nondisclosure agree-
ments is not included unless permission is obtained. Early
documentation typically addresses the entire record in a
general way. Subsequent efforts may include more in-depth
characterization.

2.1. Components:
For most long-term LENR researchers, a large record consist-
ing of several components is available. The components are
identified, described and collected during the site visit. They
are different for each participant, depending on the type and
amount of investigations, how the results were recorded and
the methods of storage. Most researchers have six types of
records.

Publications and Unpublished Reports:
Investigators often include a comprehensive list of their
LENR publications in their professional resumes. Publicly-
available reports, papers and presentations in several venues,
including journals (e.g. Journal of Condensed Matter Nuclear
Science) and magazines (e.g. Infinite Energy) are obtained.
Many of the publications for the LENR field have been
assembled in the LENR-CANR.org website.1 ResearchGate2 is
another source of participants’ LENR publications. Items not
found in public sources are usually available from the par-
ticipant’s files. Unpublished reports typically include analy-
sis of lab results, progress summaries (e.g. to sponsors) and
communications with other LENR researchers. A memo is
prepared with a list of the publications found, and copies are
collected and included in the project where possible.

Electronic Files:
Nearly all researchers have a large assemblage of electronic
files in different formats created by various kinds of software.
The files are generally of two types—documents and data
files from experiments. The initial emphasis in a project is
collection and description of the documents followed by the
data files. The electronic files are found on current comput-
ers and external storage, such as hard drives, flash memory,
servers or the Cloud. Long-term researchers often have files
on legacy media, such as CDs, ZIP discs, retired hard drives
and floppy disks. The files are included or referenced in the
project. Their location and the storage media on which they
were found are recorded in a series of memos.

Hardcopy Files:
LENR research began in the early years of the digital age, so
paper files often comprise a major component, particularly
for long-term investigators. These records are often found in
file cabinets and in boxes or storage tubs. Memos are used to
document the records, including an inventory, organization,
type of storage and location. The storage containers are also
photographed. The materials are prioritized for scanning,
and PDF files are created as needed using an LRDI scanner.
Scanning may be accomplished on site, or the materials may
be borrowed, scanned at the LRDI location and returned to
the participant.

Laboratory and Experiments:
The participant’s lab is characterized using any existing
descriptions, including experimental methods, apparatus
and equipment, materials, and data collection and analysis
methods. Additional descriptions, including previous or
legacy methods and equipment, are also prepared for the
project as required. Photos of the lab and equipment are
acquired—or new ones are taken—during the visit. Lab note-
books are described when they are available, and electronic
lab files are identified for inclusion in the project. Memos are
prepared for the descriptions and photos of the lab, equip-
ment and notebooks.

Photos, Recordings and Other Media:
Most participants have a collection of other types of media,
such as photographs and images, audio and video recordings,
and correspondence (e.g. emails, letters). The photos often
include lab equipment and experiments as well as events like
meetings and conferences. Many participants, for example,
have pictures or video recordings of presentations and atten-
dees taken at International Conferences on Cold Fusion
(ICCF). Video recordings typically consist of purchased items
(e.g. produced to describe or promote LENR), recorded televi-
sion programs (e.g. news broadcasts covering the field) and
self-made recordings of conferences and related events.

LENR Library:
Nearly all participants have a collection not only of their
own
work,
but
also
items
prepared
by
other
LENR
researchers. These items include books, published papers,
conference proceedings (e.g. ICCFs), magazines (e.g. Infinite
Energy), reports (e.g. SRI International) and related materials.
They are found in both hardcopy and electronic (e.g. PDF)
form. Some participants have reference management soft-
ware such as Endnote for their collection of references.
Copies of the electronic versions are obtained for the project,
and photos are taken of the books and other hardcopy items.
Memos are prepared listing the materials found and includ-
ing the photographs taken.

2.2. Interviews:
Personal interviews with the participant are essential for
LRDI projects. They provide the context for the research
records and are principal sources for the timelines of investi-
gation. The interviews are recorded using a hand-held
device, such as a multi-function phone with a suitable app.
The audio files are submitted to an online transcription serv-
ice. When the transcripts are received, usually within 24 to
48 hours, a cover memo describing the date, participants
and location is added. The interviews may be done in person
or by phone using another app that records the call and pro-
duces the audio files.

Generally two or more rounds of interviews are accom-
plished covering the full range of LENR research as well as a
summary of the investigator’s pre-LENR background. They
are conducted free-form to encourage the researcher to relate
what he or she feels is most memorable. Emphasis is placed
on making the recollection an enjoyable experience. More
than one round of interviews has the advantage that the
descriptions of events may vary, resulting in a more com-
plete yet consistent description of the research trajectory.

2.3. Timeline:
Documentation of an investigator’s research record is most
complete when a timeline of experiments and results can be
constructed. The timeline is determined by examining the
records and, particularly, by reviewing the interview tran-
scripts as well as conducting follow-up conversations. A
researcher’s timeline consists of phases and milestones that
reflect his or her journey of LENR investigations. The basis of
the milestones or turning points varies for different investi-
gators and typically consists of his or her own experimental
findings and progress, new ideas or insights, changes in
sponsors and events in the LENR field. A major goal of the
research timeline is to integrate the interview transcripts
with the research record.

2.4. Preservation:
A researcher’s records are secured after they have been
obtained and documented. Keeping the records available for
more analysis and interpretation based on progress by the
researcher or by new developments in the LENR field (and
with concurrence of the researcher) is a principal objective of
the LRDI. Both the participant’s records and the project doc-
uments (memos and reports) are shared between the LRDI
and the participant. This sharing is accomplished by high-
capacity flash memory (thumb drive) or in the Cloud using
commercially available storage such as Google Drive or
Dropbox. In both cases the files are backed up on a high-
capacity external hard drive for the LRDI.

2.5. Reporting:
As noted, memos are used to document each component of
the research record as well as with the interviews of the
investigator. Attachments, such as photos or long tables, are
included in the memos as required to document the materi-
als found. Project reports are prepared based on the memos,
and are typically organized as follows: 1) introduction; 2)
research record components; 3) interviews; 4) timeline; 5)
future opportunities; and 6) project methods. Future oppor-
tunities typically set forth actions to obtain additional infor-
mation and conduct more in-depth analysis, such as more
extensive descriptions of the records or additional detail in
the timeline. The methods section describes the LRDI proce-
dure and a list of the memos prepared during the project.

The project report is submitted to the participant for
review and approval. The report and memos are added to the
other project files in the selected storage medium. Where
needed, the report is prepared in stages, such as information
collection, organization (timeline) and documentation.
Appendices are used in the reports for interview transcripts
and voluminous descriptions of records, such as long lists of
publications.

2.6. Future Opportunities:
Nearly all LRDI projects are documented with suggestions of
more that can be accomplished. As noted, the initial focus of
a project is on a general description of the entire research
record. The information can then be characterized more
completely and in more detail in subsequent work. More
interviews may also be conducted, such as for particularly
significant events or findings. Additional visits to the partic-
ipant may be necessary for the added records and interviews.
The reports and other accomplishments of the projects may
be presented or published, with concurrence by the partici-
pants, under LRDI sponsorship at conferences.


3. Pilot Project: Edmund Storms’ LENR Career

The LRDI began with a pilot project for Edmund Storms,
who was one of the earliest researchers to follow up on the
1989 announcement. He began his LENR investigations
while at Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL), where he
already had a 35-year research career (since the mid-1950s)
at the time of the LENR announcement. He had worked on
high-temperature materials primarily for the nuclear rocket3
(Rover) and space reactor4 (SP-100) programs. This work led
to his report on the refractory nitrides and carbides5 as well
as his book on refractory carbides.

Dr. Storms has conducted investigations and developed
explanations for the phenomenon in the 30 years since the
announcement. His most prominent publications are his
two books, published in 20077 and 2014.8 He was honored
(along with Michael McKubre) by Wired Magazine9 in 1998
as one of the 25 people in the U.S. making a significant con-
tribution to new ideas. He was awarded the Preparata Medal,
the most prestigious award in the LENR field, in 2005. He
has also co-authored a report demonstrating that LENR is
science and not pseudoscience.10

Dr. Storms has developed a novel explanation for LENR,
referred to as the “nanocrack and hydroton” hypothesis,
which is explained at length in his 2014 book. He proposes
that numerous narrow—approximately one nanometer—
cracks are formed by stress in the host material, such as pal-
ladium. The cracks become occupied by deuterium or pro-
tium nuclei (hydrogen nuclei with or without a neutron)
that are held in the crack by negative charges on the walls of
the crack. The hydrogen nuclei become arranged in linear
structures termed hydrotons and vibrate at high frequency.

During the cycles of the vibration, the nuclei approach each
other closely—so closely that fusion occurs and some of their
mass is converted to energy in each cycle. The energy is con-
veyed from the hydroton to the host material as photons
and causes the lattice to increase in temperature. The fusion
energy, detected by the temperature increase, is referred to as
“excess heat”—energy above (sometimes far above) what can
reasonably be attributed to chemical reactions.

This hypothesis, like others in the LENR field, has not yet
been verified by reproducible experiments.
Dr. Storms’ LENR research record is extensive and goes
back to his earliest work at LANL. He has produced about
125 publications and over 110 unpublished reports. He has
thousands of electronic files on his current computer, CDs
and DVDs, ZIP discs, VHS tapes, a retired external hard drive
and 3.5-inch floppy disks. His hardcopy records are in 14
hanging-file storage tubs.

Dr. Storms’ lab was set up to perform LENR experiments
using the electrolytic cell, gas loading and gas discharge
methods. Most of the experiments are described in ten lab
notebooks. He reviewed the notebooks and prepared a
INFINITE ENERGY • ISSUE 150 • MARCH/APRIL 2020
“Work History” summary in a spreadsheet that has 2,750
entries. His LENR library has 150 books on the subject and
over 6,000 electronic and hardcopy papers authored by him-
self and nearly all of the other researchers in the LENR field.
He has a website, LENR Explained,11 to present his books
and other works, and he helped Jed Rothwell establish the
LENR-CANR.org website12 based initially on his private col-
lection of publications.

Three rounds of interviews totaling more than 22 hours
were conducted and transcribed covering Dr. Storms’ entire
range of LENR investigations. He attended nearly all of the
ICCF conferences from ICCF1 to ICCF18, and he has a near-
ly complete collection of their proceedings as well as a large
number of photos of the conference attendees and events.

A timeline has been prepared for Dr. Storms’ LENR
research career based on the records and interviews. It has
eight phases consisting of periods of support from sponsors
interspersed with self-supported investigations:
1. LENR Work at Los Alamos National Laboratory (3/1989-
2. Independent Investigation 1 (9/1991-12/1993)
3. ENECO Support (1/1994-2/1998)
4. Independent Investigation 2 (3/1998-6/2000)
5. Lattice Energy Support (7/2000-2/2006)
6. Independent Investigation 3 (3/2006-2/3007)
7. Kiva Labs (3/2007-3/2012)
8. Independent Investigation 4 (4/2012-12/2015)

Four reports have been prepared for the Storms pilot proj-
ect: 1) information collection;13 2) organization (timeline);14
3) documentation;15 and 4) summary report.16 The project
was reported at ICCF21 in 2018 as a poster.17 The Storms
LENR Research Documentation Project has also been
described on his LENR Explained website. The project report-
ed Dr. Storms’ work through 2015, so a supplemental project
is underway to extend the coverage for 2016 to 2018.


4. Participants and Projects

Participants in the LRDI vary greatly in their LENR research
experience and types and quantity of records. Other vari-
ables are the methods of recording experiments, kinds of
storage media and accessibility of the records. The LRDI pro-
cedure is flexible and is readily adapted to the various
researcher situations. As noted, a project is set up under the
LRDI umbrella for each participant or organization.

Candidates for participation are identified based on con-
tributions to the LENR research, level of interest in the LRDI,
proximity to leaving the field and potential risks of loss of
the records. The 11 projects with 15 participants to date, in
addition to the Storms pilot project, are shown below.
• Tom Claytor and Malcolm Fowler (Los Alamos National
Laboratory, retired)
• Sidney Kimmel Institute for Nuclear Renaissance (SKINR):
Dennis Pease, Arik El-Boher, Graham Hubler
• David Nagel (The George Washington University; Naval
Research Lab, retired)
• Mahadeva Srinivasan (Bhabha Atomic Research Center, retired)
• Dennis Letts (LettsLab)
• Melvin Miles (Naval Air Warfare Center, China Lake, retired)
• Naval Research Lab: David Nagel, Graham Hubler, Ashraf
Imam (all retired)
• George Miley (University of Illinois, professor emeritus)
• Fran Tanzella (SRI International, retired)
• EarthTech International: Scott Little, Marissa Little (former staff)
• Lawrence Forsley (Global Energy Corporation, U.S. NASA,
The University of Texas at Austin)
As noted, a supplemental project to extend the coverage
of the Storms Pilot Project for 2016 to 2018 is also being per-
formed. The other 11 projects are in various stages of the
LRDI procedure, from initial site visit to draft versions of the
report. Records have been collected, and interviews have
been accomplished with each of the participants. Nearly all
of the investigators have published reports, electronic and
hardcopy files, and a LENR library, and most of them have
labs and associated experimental records.


5. Summary and Future Directions

Realization of LENR and its benefits may be critical for the
future of humankind. Now 30 years after the LENR
announcement, prominent researchers are leaving the field.
Given the importance of LENR, loss of their research would
be a tragedy both to the field and to humanity. The LRDI is
underway to mitigate this loss. A sound procedure has been
developed and has been proven many times. The records of
15 researchers are being documented. An LRDI status report
was presented at ICCF22.18 A number of candidates have
been identified for future LRDI participation.

Future possibilities for the LRDI include presentations,
reports, website preparation and other outreach initiatives to
help make the case for LENR. More in-depth analysis of the
records of current investigators, such as more detailed time-
lines, may also be accomplished. A central repository could
be developed for improved protection of the LENR research
records. It would need to be secured from outside penetra-
tion (hacking), protect researcher interests with confiden-
tiality and be readily accessible by the researcher and others
whom he or she designates.

Most importantly, the records of the investigators need to
be systematically reviewed and analyzed to help understand
LENR, achieve consistent reproducibility and realize its ener-
gy and other benefits.


6. Acknowledgments

Thanks go to the LRDI participants for their willingness to be
a part of the effort and for their full support in making their
projects
a
success.
Gratitude
is
expressed
to
the
Anthropocene Institute19 for support for LRDI expenses. The
Energy Institute20 at The University of Texas at Austin has
provided facilities and administrative support.

Ed Storms not only provided information, advice and
resources for the pilot project, but also has been a supporter
and collaborator for several years before and after the pilot.
David Nagel has given generously in both moral and mate-
rial support. Thanks also go to Chip Groat, formerly of the
Energy Institute, for being a mentor and helping advance
the cause of LENR research. Jed Rothwell’s LENR-CANR.org
website of references for the field has been invaluable for the
LRDI projects.


References
1. https://lenr-canr.org/
2. https://www.researchgate.net/
3. Fishbine, B. et al. 2011. “Nuclear Rockets: To Mars and
Beyond,” Los Alamos National Laboratory, National Security
Science, Space Science Special Edition.
4. DeMuth, S. and Parker, M. 2000. “SP-100 Space Reactor
Pictorial Design Introduction,” Rev. 0. Los Alamos National
Laboratory Report LA-KUR-00-6011, December.
5. Storms, E. 1964. “A Critical Review of Refractories,” Los
Alamos National Laboratory, LA-2942, March.
6. Storms, E., 1967. The Refractory Carbides, Academic Press.
7. Storms, E. 2007. The Science of Low Energy Nuclear Reaction:
A Comprehensive Compilation of Evidence and Explanations
about Cold Fusion, World Scientific Publishing.
8. Storms, E. 2014. The Explanation of Low Energy Nuclear
Reaction:
An
Examination
of
the
Relationship
Between
Observation and Explanation, Infinite Energy Press.
9. Wired Staff. 1998. “The Wired 25,” Wired Magazine,
November.
10. Storms, E. and Grimshaw, T. 2010. “Judging the Validity
of the Fleischmann-Pons Effect,” Journal of Condensed Matter
Nuclear Science, 3, 9-30.
11. https://lenrexplained.com
12. Rothwell, J. and Storms, E. 2003. “The LENR-CANR
Website, Its Past and Future,” Proceedings of the 10th
International Conference on Cold Fusion, August 24-29,
Cambridge, MA, 939-942.
13. Grimshaw, T. and Storms, E. 2017. “Cold Fusion
Experiments and Theory Development: Documentation of Dr.
Edmund Storms’ LENR Research Career, Stage 1 (Information
Collection) Report,” April 18, http://lenrexplained.com/wp-
content/uploads/2019/01/Storms_Stage1_2ndDraft_170418.pdf
14. Grimshaw, T. and Storms, E. 2017. “Cold Fusion
Experiments and Theory Development: Documentation of Dr.
Edmund
Storms’
LENR
Research
Career,
Stage
(Organization) Report,” June 3, http://lenrexplained.com/wp-
content/uploads/2019/01/Storms_Stage2_2ndDraft_170603.pdf
15. Grimshaw, T. and Storms, E. 2018. “Cold Fusion
Experiments and Theory Development: Documentation of
Dr.
Edmund
Storms’
LENR
Research
Career,
Stage
(Documentation)
Report,”
February
http://lenrexplained.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/01/
Storms_Stage3_2ndDraft_180218.pdf
16. Grimshaw, T. and Storms, E. 2018. “Documentation of Dr.
Edmund
Storms’
Years
of
Cold
Fusion
Research:
Experiments,
Explanations,
and
Related
Scientific
Contributions.
Draft
Summary
Report,”
May
http://lenrexplained.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/01/
Storms_LRDP_Summary_180502.pdf
17. Grimshaw, T. 2018. “Documentation of Dr. Edmund
Storms’ 29 Years of CF Research: Lessons Learned for Long-
Term LENR Researchers,” Poster at the 21st International
Conference on Cold Fusion, June 3-8, Colorado State
University, Fort Collins, CO.
18. Grimshaw, T. 2019. “LENR Research Documentation
Initiative:
Progress
in
Methods
and
Participants,”
Presentation at the 22nd International Conference on
Condensed Matter Nuclear Science (ICCF22), September 8-
13, Assisi, Italy.
19. https://www.anthropoceneinstitute.com/
20. https://energy.utexas.edu/

