THE NUCLEAR REACTIONS IN CONDENSED MEDIA FOR INTERACTION OF CHARGED PARTICLES IN ENERGY
REGION IS FORMING BY MAXIMUM ELASTIC LOSSES
V. A. ROMODANOV, V. I. SAVIN, * Ya. B. SKURATNIK, ** V. N. MAJOROV
StateSRI SPA “LUTCH”, Zheleznodorozhnaya 24, Podolsk, Moscow reg. 142100. RUSSIA.
T. :095-137-9258. F. :095-137-9384. E-m.: luch@adis.msk.su
* StateSC RF “Karpov SRPCI”, Vorontsov pole 10, Moscow, 103064. RUSSIA.
** RSC “Kurchatov Institute”, sq. Kurchatov 1, Moscow, 123292. RUSSIA


Abstract

The main requirements to reproduce the generation of nuclear reactions in
condensed media (NRCM), have been identified which appear to influence the
interaction of fast hydrogen ions with a solid target in a powerful plasma glow
discharge. Phenomenon of three branches of physics have contributed to this
work: nuclear physics, solid state physics and low energy plasma physics, and
have in turn opened a new direction of fundamental research. The essence of
this new direction is the ability of a low-energy plasma to interact with a
solid target, creating nuclear reactions at a rate several orders of magnitude
than predicted by calculations for the some conditions.
The experimental results are presented which validation the formation of a new
direction for nuclear research.


1. Introduction

ulate NRCM at low energies of interacting particles, excess energy can be
created. These reactions arise at bombardment of a solid specimens by
accelerated of a hydrogen isotopes, besides the quantity of generated energy
can be registered on such products of the nuclear reactions, as for example,
tritium. The set of experimental results is already sufficient as for formation
of scientific problems, as main directions of use NRCM.

The present work is devoted to formulating this new field of nuclear
phenomena and assessing the prospects of their practical use power systems.


2. Equipment and Methodology

Experiments to study excess heat, production of transportation elements
and generation of neutrons and tritium, helium-3 and helium-4, charged
particles, and gamma and x-ray radiation were carried out primarily by using DC
glow discharge in the upgraded installation UVN-84R-1 [4].

The 250-1 vacuum chamber included a heater for outgassing the chamber.
The discharge unit consisted of a sample-cathode, anode, ceramic insulators and
thermocouples. The vacuum system consisted of two turbo-molecular pumps TMN-200
and TMN-500, trap by nitrogen, a mechanical pump and control valves. The
plasma-forming gas was filled into the chamber through a system of filtering
and control valves. The pressure was controlled by thermo-coupling, ionization,
mechanical and oil pressure gauges in a range from 10-6 Pa up to 105 Pa.

The essence of our experiments [4-7] consisted that ions of hydrogen
isotopes were bombarded the sample-cathode of plasma glow discharge at
submission of negative potential on the sample. For sample use plates, tubes
with thickness of walls of 0.2-5 mm and rods by a diameter of 2-20 mm. Samples
were made from diverse metals, predominantly from hydride-formation and
refractory. The basis of a plasma-formation gas was deuterium with the contents
protean in atomic fractions up to 5% and tritium up to (6-8)*10-10% pressure
which supported in limits (1-1.5*105) Pa.

The energy of ions, depending on pressure, was evaluated within the
limits of 0.7-0.01 from voltage of the glow discharge, which changed from 200 V
up to 10,000 V. The current density made 5.102 – 105 A/m2. The sample
temperature during researchers set of 700 K for 3600 K.

Registration of slow neutrons executed by a system RTM from 60 gauges
SNM-12 on the basis helium-3. The registration of fast neutrons was executed in
addition by a shield the device RUP-one with scintillator on the basis of a
zinc sulfide activated by silver. The sensitivity of measurement a flow of
neutrons reached 1 neutrons/S, and the air was limits within of the order from
measured magnitude.

Analysis of the deuterium on tritium, assembled before and after ions
bombardment, conducted on beta-activity by a liquid scintillation method on the
equipment Beta-2. The error of measurement of the contents tritium in tests
made 10-50%.


3. Main results

Researches on measurement of flow neutrons, conducted at bombardment of
various elements by accelerated deuterium ions from a plasma of glow discharge
with energy up to 10 keV have shown, that the excess of background level on
fast neutrons reaches not more double excess even for a tritium-titanium target
[4].

The most significant results are received by us at registration NRCM on a
tritium generation. The initial level tritium in deuterium, measured on beta
activity, is exceeded on four-five orders, and the tritium generation rate
reached 109 Atom/s four glow discharge and 1015 Atom/s for a device on the
basis Z-pinch. Thus the coefficient of nuclear interaction has about 10-10
Atom/ion.

Measurements of tritium in a gas confirmed by duplication of measurements
on flowing beta-recorder from a surface sample, at simultaneous registration of
a spectrum energy, radiography of a surface at the x-ray films as well as
control of the tritium contents in the material sample.

It is fixed tritium transmutation in zirconium on high-energy betaactivity
of radiated samples, with zirconium-to-tritium flux ratio at the level
10-7 – 10-6. The main experimental results, which permit to declare formation of
a new direction of nuclear researchers, can be grouped in the following order:

1. The rate NRCM in the energy range of ions 10 - 10,000 eV, determined
on the tritium generation rate, exceeded of the calculation for thermonuclear
channel on a some orders.

ed 10-9 - 10-7, which while it is impossible to consider final of in
comparison, small flows of neutrons [4]. These results will be well agreed
other researchers, for example, with [8]. Usually, at high-energy interaction,
this ratio is close unit.

aterial and concentration of a hydrogen in the material. According to
experimental results, the rate NRCM was increased with increasing concentration
of the hydrogen and increasing nuclear number of the target material and
maximum results, up to the present time, are received on zirconium, niobium and
tungsten [2, 4]. However, for heavy materials, located higher in the middle
Mendeleev table, unequivocal results to receive has not managed. While it is
not known, whether it is connected with insufficient optimization regimes of
ion bombardment or with new law.

Dependence of efficiency NRCM from energy of ions is present by self
threshold dependence (about 100 eV) and is weak varying at energy higher
threshold.

Four processes NRCM the dependence of a tritium generation efficiency
from current density is close to linear [1]. It give a opportunity to select
parameters of ion bombardment for maintenance of necessary speed of nuclear
reactions.

The dependence of efficiency t.ri tium ge.neration from pressLu-e of the
plasma-forming gas has maximum in the range 1f􀡰􀡱􀡲t1 Pa and has no analogues
in usuaJ. processe:=; [ 􀡳, J .

TI1e subm.i tted cler::,endences are received i.n a plenty of experirrents, the ge-neral
number c,f which exceeds thousand, that m..-=tlms resuJ. t:=:: stat.ist.ically determined
and conclus.ion--safety.


4. Discussion

