1. Background

A small research groupa has been investigating different methods for producing
excess heat for several years now. We are now starting to see some success in
our research. We use plasma, lasers, electromagnetic fields, contaminate defects,
etc. in attempts to stimulate excess heat from cathodic reactions. The author
researches in the area of creating defects or sites that may create excess heat in
metal films. Generally, the cathodes are small and surrounded by a large anode.
Surface contaminants and conditions, surface areas and perimeters, geometries, etc.
are considered important in producing an efficient cell. Then scaling up through
the replication of the cell unit into a plurality is done to produce larger quantities
of power. These embodiments are documented in a recent patent application.1

A growing body of experimental evidence in this last decade has shown that
some types of low-energy-induced nuclear (LEIN) reactionsb are possible. These
could be, and are thought to be by the group, the reactions referred to as non-Joule
heating. One series of electrolytic experiments by Dr. Tadhiko Mizuno emitted

Figure 1. Non-Joule heating efficiency versus input current.


bursts of 105–106 neutrons at the cathode lasting up to 200 s.2 Such experiments
confirm the existence of the new reactions. Better theories may be developed that
explain the non-Joule heating phenomena that have been observed but this does
not change the results, embodiments, and claims documented within the patent
application.

Unfortunately, most attempts to increase power yields have faltered when increasing input power or increasing the size and configuration of the cell. This is
because increasingly disproportional amounts of the input power went into Joule
heating of the cell and not into cathode boundary layers where the desired reactions occur. Joule-heating losses increase to the square of the applied voltage as
shown in Fig. 1. Several designs and scale-up attempts have failed because the
non-productive Joule heating quickly grew into overshadow the cathodic reactions.

Through the research of the group and others, we have concluded that further
developments of and improvements in energy power systems utilizing electrolysis of
liquid, plasma, or gas fluids are hampered by:

• an inability to scale-up because Joule-heating of the electrolyte (or proton/deuteron conductive media) becomes increasing dominant to the desired non-Joule heating processes;

• a lack of increased fluxes to heighten chances of non-Joule reaction at the
cathode, and especially, in the cathode boundary layers where the desired
non-Joule reactions take place;

• a lack of increased overpotential that drives the desired non-Joule reactions
at the cathode, and especially, in the cathode boundary layers where the
non-Joule reactions take place.

Figure 2. Basic MultiCell unit design.


2. Basic Design

The MultiCell is a small electrochemical cell designed to increase desired cathodic
reactions in the electrolytic system/reactor and decreased Joule heating of electrolyte. The reactor’s basic design involves a small unit, called a MultiCell unit.
The MultiCell unit increases non-Joule heating efficiencies due its small size and a
unique electrode construction having: a small cathode, a large anode, small gap,
large cathode perimeter-to-surface area ratio, and symmetrical designs that synergistically increase the overpotential and desired cathodic reactions near the surface
of the cathode while decreasing the less desired Joule-heating processes. The simplest MultiCell design is shown in Fig. 2. The MultiCell unit’s unique design allows
repetitive replication of the unit (much like a component on a circuit board or computer chip) to acquire the desired power output while still maintaining the efficiency
of the small MultiCell unit. MultiCells have been immersed in an electrolyte bath
to produce boiling water.


3. Object of the MultiCell Unit

The MultiCell design promotes a larger portion of the voltage drop to happen at
or near the surface of cathodes. Focusing electrons and ions (protons/deuterons)
into small areas and forcing them to flow through thin layers increases the flux,
but it also increases the overvoltage (voltage drop) at and in the cathode surface
boundary layers. Tafel’s law (Eq. (1)) quantifies the relationship between flux and
overpotential.

η = a + b loge I, (1)

Figure 3. Replication of the MultiCell unit to increase power (actual photo).

where η is the overpotential in volts i the current density (electron flux, e−/m2 s)
or proton/deuteron flux (H+/m2 s or D+/m2 s), and a and b are constants.

Unfortunately, this shows that overvoltage is less than proportional to the applied flux. This makes focusing the fluxes even more important, as the MultiCell
does.


4. Cathode Materials and Morphology

A cathode substrate that can withstand the environment in the cell needs to be used.
It is also felt that it should prevent leakage of hydrogen into the understructure,
for example gold, copper, silver or platinum. A cathode size of less than 1 cm2 is
generally used.

We believe that “desired” heat-producing cathodic reactions happen in the surface of the cathode and not in the bulk of the cathode. We further believe that
defects or sites in or on that surface are important in producing the desired reactions. The described embodiments were designed to validate these concepts, for
example, they may use thin layers of palladium metal plated on a gold substrate
cathode. Defects are formed on surface from the use of uranium, rhodium, and other
elements. These give sites where hydrogen/deuterium can pair up and increase their
chances to interact with themselves or atoms of the host electrode and environment.
The sites are envisioned to provide areas where the hydrogen-recombination overpotential is high, which is considered important by some. Rare earth metals (e.g.
cerium and lanthanum) are often used because they may provide a counter nuclear
spin that helps in the coupling of hydrogen/deuterium.

Figure 4. MultiCell non-circular pattern.

Palladium metal is often used as the anode. Using palladium limits the number
of contaminates entering the electrolyte. Also, dissolution of the palladium from
the anode can slowly plate out onto the cathode. This appears to be useful in the
production of excess heat because it felt that it is the small crystal structures and
contaminants and/or in the surface cathode are big contributors to the production
of excess heat.

Cathode surfaces with corrugations, crevices, or large perimeter-to-surface area
ratios are envisioned to increase edge-boundary layer reaction sites. Deposits of
alternating thin layers of dissimilar electrically conductive materials, e.g. palladium
and nickel, are being investigated.


5. Configurations

Figures 2 and 3 show the basic circular design. These designs can be constructed
from plate stock or films onto a substrate. However, they tend to be more difficult construct than non-circular designs because they require construction in different planes to facilitate separation of the cathodes and anode(s). Whereas, the
non-circular designs can be constructed form materials in the same plane. Figures 4 and 5(a) (taken from the patent application) show non-circular designs. The
components of these are similar to the circular designs, except the cathode is long
and slender. In Fig. 5(a) the cathode is constructed of connected dots in a row to
increase the perimeter-to-surface area ratio.

Figure 5. (a) MultiCell non-circular pattern; (b) an actual MultiCell (actual size).


6. Plasma Configuration

During operation of a MultiCell shown in Fig. 6 a blue glow or discharge can occur
around the cathode (item 30 of Fig. 6). Notice the design is patterned after the
non-circular MultiCell embodiment in where the cathode is smaller than the anode
(see Fig. 4, envelope A). The blue glow does not happen until 50–100 V are applied.
The exact voltage depends on configuration, electrolyte concentration, etc. While
increasing voltage from zero, the current continues to increase until the blue glow
or corona appears. Then the current sharply drops indicating a sharp increase in
resistance. This marked decrease in resistance, when the plasma forms, implies that
a significant voltage drop at the cathode surface boundary layers where the plasma
forms. Figure 6 shows the operation and data collection of a plasma MultiCell unit
as cited in the Patent Application. Unlike the other cells mentioned in this paper,
this cell usually used light water instead of heavy water.

Experiments were run with this unit where high excess heat (>30%) were measured. Others have tried to measure its heat in flow-through calorimeters but it
does not perform as well in such systems. This is because such systems require the
cell to be run in at an enclosed cell with bath temperature around 50 ◦C. Whereas,
the cell seems to performed best at higher, even boiling, temperatures.

Others, such as Tadahiko Mizuno, have also experimented with plasma. His
original cell used larger plate cathodes. His latest cell now also uses a smaller cathode and larger anode design. The amount of hydrogen generated by an electrolytic
cell is generally calculated by using Faraday’s law. However, this is not correct
for a plasma cell. The high temperatures and energies at the cathode break down
water in disproportional amounts. Mizuno has measured where the excess hydrogen
generation reaches more than 30% of energy input.3

Figure 6. Process control, testing, and calorimetry apparatus for plasma MultiCell unit enbodiment.


7. Methods of Producing MultiCell Electrically Conductive
Patterns

The patent application also discloses developed and demonstrated methods to efficiently and accurately produce metal patterns on electrically non-conductive materials with the use of an ink-jet printer device. The technique uses an ink-jet
printer with special inks containing soluble palladium (or other catalyzing metal)
compounds to produce the desired patterns or pictures on paper or other materials. Then the palladium compounds are reduced to metallic palladium (see Fig. 7).
Finally, electroless (e.g. nickel, cobalt, copper, gold, platinum and palladium) plating solutions are used to deposit metal films over the metallic palladium patterns
(see Fig. 8). Even though the palladium metal (or other similar material) is in low
concentration, it acts as a catalyst and provides the sites needed for the electroless
metal process to begin. The deposited metal then acts as its own catalyst and continues the plating process. Other layers of different metals can then be deposited on

Figure 7. Palladium metal pattern produced by ink-jet printer (actual size).

the metal patterns using standard electrolytic and/or electroless metal depositing
techniques.

Using different metal solutions applied as different “colored inks” can make
alloys and contaminants of varying composition. One of the “colored inks” can be a
reductant that develops the sprayed pattern. This can be repeated until the desired
thickness is obtained.

Figure 8. Nickel plated onto palladium pattern.

There are manufactured glass and ceramic glazes that contain palladium, copper,
silver, gold, and platinum, etc. compounds that can be applied like paint. When
heated, the organic compounds in these paints reduce the compounds to elemental
metals. Hand applying, silk-screening, or other methods can be used to apply
the paints in the desired patterns to the substrate. Appling a thinned solution
of palladium paint can produce a catalyzed pattern like the above-cited technique
prior to performing electroless plating.


8. Conclusion
MultiCell concepts have yielded good results and further developments appear
promising and will continue. However, development is slow because of the shoestring
budgets of the group. Most of the funds come from the “day jobs” salaries of the
group.


References

1. R.F. Gimpel, D.J. Cravens, J.S. Frick, V.F. Golubic and D.G. Letts, MultiCell Reactors,
20 June 2000, US Patent Office Patent Application Serial No. 09/597,650.
2. T. Mizuno et al., Jpn. J. Appl. Sci. Phys. 40, L989–L991 (2001).
3. T. Mizuno, T. Akimoto and T. Ohmori, in Generation of Heat and Products During Plasma Electrolysis, Paper and Presentation, Proceedings of the 10th International
Conference on Cold Fusion, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA, 24–29 August 2003.
