METHOD AND APPARATUS FOR CARRYING
OUT NICKEL AND HYDROGEN
EXOTHERMAL REACTION


BACKGROUND OF THE INVENTION

The present invention relates to a method and apparatus
for carrying out nickel and hydrogen exothermal reactions,
and has been stimulated by the well known requirement
of finding energy sources alternative to fossil sources, to
prevent atmospheric carbon dioxide contents from being
unnecessarily increased.

For meeting the above need non polluting energy
sources should be found which do not involve health risks, are
economically competitive with respect to oil sources susceptible
to be easily discovered and exploited and naturally abundant.

Many of the above alternative energy sources have
already been explored and operatively tested even on an
industrial scale, and comprise biomasses, solar energy used
both for heating and photovoltaic electric generation purposes,
aeolian energy. fuel materials of vegetable or agricultural
nature, geothermal and sea wave energy and so on.

A possible alternative to natural oil, is the uraniumfission
nuclear energy. However, yet unresolved problems
affect nuclear energy such as great safety and waste material
processing problems, since, as is well known, radioactive
waste materials remain dangerously active for thousands or
millions of years, with consequent great risks for persons
living near radioactive waste disposal-off places.

To the above the fact should also be added that, at
present, a nuclear fusion based on a laser actuated inertial
confining method does not allow to make efficient power
systems.

The above drawbacks are also true for deuteriumtritium
fusion processes, as shown by the operating times
estimated for the ITER project, which should within the year
2025 should allow to construct power systems according to
the so-called DEMO project to make, within the year 2035,
the first fusion power station.

In fact, up to now, the so-called "cold" fusion, after
an early announcement by Fleischmann and Pons in 1989 (M.
Fleischmann, M. Hawkins, S. Pons: Journal Electroanal.
Chem., 261,301-1989), notwithstanding several exploiting
attempts on a world-wise scale, has not provided useful and
reliable systems capable of generating energy for normal,
industrial or domestic applications.

The most intelligent work performed in the fusion
field, which work has been accurately studied by the present
inventor for practicing his invention, is a study of Prof. Sergio
Focardi, (Dipartimento di Fisica dell'Univerita di Bologna),
and Prof. Francesco Piantelli, (Dipartimento di Fisica
dell'Universita di Siena) as disclosed in the following bibliographic
documents:

S. Focardi, F. Piantelli: Produzione di energia e
reazioni nucleari in sistemi Ni—H a 400° C., Atti della
Conferenza Nazionale sulla politica energetica in Italia,
University di Bologna, 18-19 aprile 2005

S. Focardi, R. Habel, F. Piantelli: Anomalous heat
production in Ni-H systems, Nuovo Cimento Vol. 107,
pp 163-167, 1994

S. Focardi, V. Gabbiani, V. Montalbano, F. Piantelli,
S. Veronesi: Large excess in heat production in
Ni-H systems, Nuovo Cimento Vol. 111 A pp. 1233-
1241, 1998

A. Battaglia, L. Daddi, S. Focardi, V. Gabbiani, V.
Montalbano. F. Piantelli, P. G. Sona. S. Veronesi: Neutron
emission in Ni —H systems, Nuovo Cimento Vol.
112 App 921-931. 1999

S. Focardi. V. Gabbiani. V. Montalbano. F. Piantelli,
S. Veronesi: On the Ni-H systems, Asti Workshop
in Hydrogeldeuterium loaded metals, pp 35-47, 1997

E. G. Campari, S. Focardi, V. Gabbiani, V. Montalbano.
F. Piantelli, E. Porcu, E. Tosti, S. Veronesi:
Ni —H systems, Proceedings of the 8th Conference on
Cold Fusion, pp 69-74, 2000.

The present inventor, moreover, has also accurately
studies the following related patents: U.S. Pat. No. 6,236,225,
U.S. Pat. No. 5,122,054, US-H466, U.S. Pat. No. 4,014,168,
U.S. Pat. No. 5,552,155, U.S. Pat. No. 5,195,157, U.S. Pat.
No. 4,782,303, U.S. Pat. No. 4,341,730, US-A-
20010024789.

An analysis of the above mentioned references
shows that:1—all experiments performed based on cold fusion
have not permitted to generate power in such an amount to be
reliably and constantly exploited in industrial applications 

2—all the uranium based methods and systems have
not up to now solved the problem of safely disposing of
nuclear waste materials;

3—all the nuclear fusion based methods and systems
have not been shown as capable of generating significative
amounts of energy while allowing the fusion process to
be safely monitored;

4—all the magnetic and inertial confining based
methods and systems, such as the plasma fusion method,
cannot be properly economically managed; and

5—the catalyzed fusion of negative muons based
methods and systems cannot be used because of the muon
short life.


SUMMARY OF THE INVENTION

Accordingly, the aim of the present invention is to
provide a method allowing to produce energy in an economic,
convenient, reliable and repetitive manner. without generating
radiations and radioactive waste materials.

Within the scope of the above mentioned aim, a
main object of the invention is to provide such a method
which can be carried out in small size systems, adapted to be
easily controlled and allowing to heat individual places at an
operating cost less than that of commercially available heating
systems.

According to one aspect of the present invention, the
above mentioned aim and objects, as well as yet other objects,
which will become more apparent hereinafter, are achieved
by a method and apparatus for carrying out a highly efficient
exothermal reaction between nickel atoms and hydrogen
atoms, in a tube, preferably, though not exclusively made of a
metal, filled by a nickel powder and heated to a high temperature
preferably, though not necessarily, from 150 to 500° C.,
by injecting hydrogen into said metal tube said nickel powder
being pressurized, preferably, though not necessarily, to a
pressure from 2 to 20 bars.

In applicant exothermal reaction the hydrogen
nuclei, due to a high absorbing capability of nickel therefor,
are compressed about the metal atom nuclei, while said high
temperature generates internuclear percussions which are
made stronger by the catalytic action of optional elements,
thereby triggering a capture of a proton by the nickel powder, with a consequent transformation of nickel to copper and a
beta+ decay of the latter to a nickel nucleus having a mass
which is by an unit larger than that of the starting nickel.

The present inventor believes that in this reaction is
possibly involved a capture of a proton by a nickel nucleus
which is transformed into a copper nucleus with a consequent
beta decay of the formed unstable copper (Cu 59-64) since the
produced thermal energy is larger, as it will be thereinafter
demonstrated, than the energy introduced by the electric
resistance.

It is believed that the nickel nuclei are transformed
to copper since the mass (energy) of the final status (copper
isotope) is less than the overall mass (energy) of the starting
status (nickel isotope+proton)

The exothermal reaction thereon Applicant's invention
is based differs from those adopted by prior searchers
since the inventor has not tried to demonstrate an emission of
elementary particles supporting a validity of a theory, but he
has exclusively tried to provide an amount of energy larger
than the consumed energy amount, to just achieve a practical
method and apparatus for generating an energy amount larger
than the consumed energy, and this by exploiting nuclear
energy generating processes starting from electrochemical
energy

Thus, the inventive apparatus has been specifically
designed for producing the above mentioned energy in a
reliable, easily controllable, safe, repeatable manner, for any
desired applications.

In particular, the inventive apparatus is coated by
boron layers and lead plates both for restraining noxious
radiations and transforming them into energy, without generating
residue radiations and radioactive materials.

In this connection it is pointed out that all prior
attempts to generate like types of energy, have brought to
small energy amounts generating prototypes not suitable for
a safe industrial use, because of the theoretical nature of the
performed searches


SUMMARY OF THE INVENTION

Thus, the aim of the present invention is to provide
an energy generating apparatus adapted to operate in a reliable
and repeatable manner and including a plurality of series
and parallel connectable apparatus modules, thereby generating
an impressively high energy amount by so bombarding
a nickel atom by a hydrogen atom, to provide a large atomic
mass loss copper atom to be transformed into energy, based
on the Einstein's equation, plus a beta decay energy of the
radioactive copper atoms

The following discussion may be considered as
valid for some (radioactive) Cu isotopes, but not for the two
stable copper isotopes (63Cu and ^65Cu) which do not
decay.

As the copper atom decays, an energy emitting positive
beta decay occurs, according to the following equations P=N+e++v,
where
P=proton
N=neutron
E'=positron
v=neutrino

The positron forms the electron antiparticle, and
hence, as positrons impact against the nickel electrons, the
electron-positron pairs are annihilated, thereby generating a
huge amount of energy.

In fact, few grams of Ni and H would produce an
energy amount equivalent to that of thousands oil tons, as it
will become more apparent hereinafter, without pollutions,
greenhouse effects, or carbon dioxide increases, nuclear and
other waste materials, since the radioactive copper isotopes
produced in the process will decay to stable nickel isotopes by
beta+processes, in a very short time.

For clearly understanding the following detailed
discussion of the apparatus, it is necessary to at first consider
that for allowing nickel to be transformed into stable copper,
it is necessary to respect the quantic laws. Accordingly, it is
indispensable to use, for the above mentioned exothermal
reactions, a nickel isotope having a mass number of 62, to
allow it to transform into a stable copper isotope 62. All the
other Ni isotopes, on the other hand, will generate unstable
Cu, and, accordingly, a beta decay.

Considering that about 106 t ons nickel for year are
produced through the world and since, as it will be disclosed
hereinafter in Table 1, 1 g nickel would generate an energy
amount equivalent to that produced by 517 tons oil, thus the
yearly produced nickel amount, assuming that only 1/40,00o
generates nuclear processes, will provide 1,000,000,000,
000*517110000-51,700,000,000 (oil equivalent) ton per year.

And this without considering the fact that the yearly
nickel production could be easily increased, depending on
demand, and that, like mineral oil, nickel can be recovered
and remelted from nickel scraps of steelwork and electronic
applications.

Actually, nickel is one of the most abundant metals
of the Earth crust.


BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF THE DRAWINGS

Further characteristics and advantages of the
present invention will become more apparent hereinafter
from the following detailed disclosure of a preferred, though
not exclusive, embodiment of the invention, which is illustrated,
by way of an indicative, but not limitative, example, in
the accompanying drawings, where:

FIG. 1 is a constructional diagram of the apparatus
according to the present invention

FIG. 2 is a picture, taken by a 1.400x electronic
microscope, showing the nickel powder (on a 1.400x scale),
withdrawn by the apparatus;

FIGS. 3 and 4 are electronic microscope diagrams
related to the powder atomic composition, at the two points
shown by the arrows in FIG. 2.


DESCRIPTION OF THE PREFERRED
EMBODIMENT

With reference to the number references of the
above mentioned figures, the apparatus according to the
present invention comprises an electric resistance 1, enclosed
in a metal tube 2, further including therein a nickel powder 3.

A solenoid valve 4 adjusts the pressure under which
hydrogen 5 is introduced into the metal tube.

Both the temperature generated by the electric resistance
or resistor and the hydrogen injection pressure can be
easily adjusted either to constant or pulsating values.

More specifically, the electric resistance, or other
heat source, is switched off as the exothermal reaction generating energizing status is triggered. A thermostat will hold
said heat source operating, depending on the temperature in
the circuit.

The assembly comprising said electric resistance
and nickel holding copper tube is shielded from the outer
environment by using. respectively from the inside to the
outside:

a) a jacket 7 including water and boron, or only
boron

b) a further lead jacket 8, which, optionally, though
not necessarily, may be coated by a steel layer 9.

The above mentioned coatings are so designed as to
restrain all radiations emitted by the exothermal reaction and
transform said radiation into thermal energy

The heat generated by the particle decay and nuclear
transformations will heat the primary fluid, comprising
borated water, thereby said primary fluid, in turn, will
exchange heat with the secondary circuit, in turn heated by
said primary fluid and conveying the produced thermal
energy to desired applications, such as electric power, heating,
mechanical energy, and so on.

In the absence of a primary fluid, the fluid to be
heated will exchange heat directly with the lead and steel
jacket.

According to a further embodiment of the invention,
the apparatus further comprises the following features

Nickel is coated in a copper tube 100, including a
heating electric resistance 101, adjusted and controlled by a
controlling thermostat (not shown) adapted to switch off said
resistance 101 as nickel is activated by hydrogen contained in
a bottle 107.

A first steel-boron armored construction 102, coated
by a second lead armored construction 103, protect both the
copper tube, the hydrogen bottle connection assembly 106,
and the hydrogen bottle or cylinder 107, thereby restraining
radiations through the overall radiation life, allowing said
radiations to be transformed into thermal energy

On the outside of the lead armored construction. the
copper reactor cooling water, circulates through a steel outer
pipe assembly 105, and this conveyed to thermal energy using
devices.

The above disclosed prototype can also be used as a
heating module which, in a series and/or parallel coupling
relationship with other like modules, will provide a basic core
desired size and power heating systems

A practical embodiment of the inventive apparatus,
installed on Oct. 16, 2007, is at present perfectly operating 24
hours per day, and provides an amount of heat sufficient to
heat the factory of the Company EON of via Carlo Ragazzi
18, at Bondeno (Province of Ferrara).

For better understanding the invention, the main
components of the above mentioned apparatus have been
schematically shown in Table 2

The above mentioned apparatus. which has not been
yet publicly disclosed, has demonstrated that, for a proper
operation, the hydrogen injection must be carried out under a
variable pressure.

The electric resistance temperature controlling thermostat
has been designed to switch off said electric resistance
after 3-4 hours of operation, thereby providing self-supplied
system. continuously emitting thermal energy in an amount
larger than that initially generated by said electric resistance,
which mode of operation is actually achieved by an exothermal
reaction.

As it will be shown in a detailed manner in the
following Table 1, it is possible to calculate that, supposing a
full transformation, a mole, that is 58 g nickel, generate the
same amount of energy obtained by burning about 30,000
tons of oil.

FIGS. 2-5 show data measured on Jan. 30, 2008
which basically demonstrate that the invention actually provides
a true nuclear cold fusion

The photo of FIG. 2, (obtained by a 1.400x electronic
microscope) shows the nickel powder on a 1.400x
scale, as withdrawn from the apparatus: in particular said
photo clearly shows the flake granules, greatly promoting an
absorption of the hydrogen atoms by the nickel nuclei.

The two arrows in the figure show the two positions
of the powder sample thereon the electronic microscope tests
for detecting the powder atomic composition have been carried
out.

The two graphs of FIGS. 3 and 4 have been made by
the electronic microscope of Dipartimento di Fisica
delFUniversita di Bologna, under the supervision of Prof.
Sergio Focardi, on Jan. 30, 2008, and are related to the powder
atomic composition at the two above points of FIG. 2.

In particular, said graphs clearly show that zinc is
formed, whereas zinc was not present in the nickel powder
originally loaded into the apparatus said zinc being actually
generated by a fusion of a nickel atom and two hydrogen
atoms.

This demonstrates that, in addition to fusion, the
inventive reaction also provides a nickel nucleus fission phenomenon
generating lighter stable atoms

Moreover, it has been found that, after having generated
energy the used powders contained both copper and
lighter than nickel atoms (such as sulphur, chlorine, potassium,
calcium).

This demonstrate that, in addition to fusion, also a
nickel nucleus fission phenomenon generating lighter stable
atoms occurs

It has been found that the invention fully achieves
the intended aim and objects.