I. INTRODUCTION

This paper presents molecular-dynamic simulation results
for a dilute solution of hydrogen in palladium and
compares the predicted motion of the hydrogen in the octahedral
interstitial site with the available incoherent inelastic
neutron-scattering results. ' These calculations
benefit from current advances in the description of interatomic
forces in metallic solutions. Because these calculations
focus on dynamical properties for which measured
and computed quantities can be simply and directly
compared, they provide a new test of the efticacy of the
model force law used. Such a test is clearly a prudent
step preparatory to atomically detailed theoretical studies
of more global thermal properties of hydrogen-metal
solutions such as phase transitions and more macroscopic
transport processes. Furthermore, these results should be
of guidance in describing interatomic forces in more complex
metallic systems not satisfactorily treated by the
current models.

Incorporation of hydrogen into metals elicits several
phenomenon of intrinsic interest, for example, embrittlement
of the metal. The hydrogen-palladium system has
probably been studied more extensively than any other
metal hydride. It displays unusual isotope effects on temperatures
of transition to superconductive behavior.
Phonon-dispersion relations have been measured by inelastic
neutron scattering for concentrated PdH„sytems,
and these phonon spectra have been modeled by latticedynamical
calculations. ' Molecular-dynamics calculations
have been carried out previously" on an empirical
pairwise force model of PdH„ in supercritical thermodynamic
states. ' Under those conditions much of the interest
in PdH is associated with the transport phenomena
typified by fast ion conductors.

The next section records procedural details of the
molecular-dynamics calculations. Secion III then
presents and discusses the results. The final section notes
the conclusions drawn from these calculations.


II. MOLECULAR-DYNAMICS METHODS

The calculations were carried out for a system of 256
Pd atoms and one H atom. The Pd atoms were situated0
initially in a fcc lattice with a lattice constant of 3.89 A
and the H atom was placed in an octahedral interstitial
site. The embedded-atom model description of interatomic
forces presented in Ref. 5 was used without
modification except that the model atomic electron densities
were smoothly truncated on a sphere of radius 7.780
A. This latter distance corresponds to one-half the edge
length of the cubical simulation cell within which the interaction
potential energies and the interatomic forces
were computed with the usual periodic boundary conditions.
The model atomic electron densities were modified
on the segment (6.67S,7.780 A) by substitution with a cubic
spline which vanished with zero derivative at the
outer boundary. The equations of motion were integrated
by the explicit central difference method, ' or summed
Verlet method. ' The estimated standard error was obtained
by assuming that distinct 20 ps blocks of trajectory
were independent samples of the property in question.


III. RESULTS

The mean kinetic energy of the system over our observation
yields a temperature estimate of (297+6) K. The
predicted pressure of pV/Nk~ T=(0.01+0.02) was realistically
low. It is known from experiment that H vibrational
motions in Pd occur at frequencies which are low
compared to those of H vibrations'in usual covalent interactions.
' Therefore, at this temperature the H
motions may be expected to be largely classical in character,
although quantum-mechanical characteristics are
easily observed. This expectations can be tested simply
and quantitatively in the context of the present calculations.
In particular, the initial quantum-mechanical
correction to the classical-mechanical Helmholtz free energy
of the system is'

PA =PA, +—,
' g (PfiQ, ) +o(A' } .
Here, A is the Helrnholtz free energy and A, is that free
energy obtained from the classical phase-space integral;
p =( k~ T)
' is the inverse temperature in energy units.
The frequency Q. is
P(F'&
n,'= (2) j
where (F & is the mean-square force on particle jand m.
is the mass of that particle. The frequency Q can also be
obtained from observation of the classical motion of the
jth particle through use of the sum rule
dc' 6) U~
Q =
f dco fv„i'
Here we have used the notation
(3)
f dt coscot ( v(0)U (t) & l(U &,
2'fT oo
where (U(0)u (t) & is the autocorrelation of the velocity of
the particle. With this definition the denominator appearing
in Eq. (3) is equal to 1. The present calculations
produce the estimate QH=(97+13) meV for the H-atom
solute. This is only a factor of 5 larger, approximately,
than the correspondoing frequency for the Pd atoms
(averaged over all the Pd atoms), Qpd=(21. 2+0.02) meV.
The ratio of the frequencies is therefore considerably
smaller than the square root of the ratio of the masses,
&106. This implies that the forces on the H solute are
typically considerably less then the forces which localized
the Pd atoms in the fcc solid. This situation is rejected
in the fact that the rms displacement of the H atom from
its mean position in the center of the octahedral hole is
quite substantial: [—, '((rH &—(rH & )]'~ =(0.138+0.005)
A, where rH is the position of the H atom. This is consistent
with the value of (0.25+0. 10) A obtained by neutron
di6'raction on dilute PdH samples in the neighborhood
of 600 K.' The larger value of the measured quantity
is understood as a result of the higher temperature
state studied by the available experiments. The ratio of
these two quantities is consistent with a v'T temperature
dependence but the size of the estimated errors on the experimental
values does not permit a stronger conclusion.


A. Neutron vibrational spectroscopy

The vibrational spectrum of the H-atom motion dissolved
at low concentrations in Pd has been measured by
incoherent inelastic neutron scattering. ' These experiments
provide directly the Fourier transform of the autocorrelation
function F,(k, t)=(exp[ik. rH(t)]exp[ —ik rH(0)]& . (5) t (ps)
For ~k ~ sufficiently small, we can write
F,(k, t)=1+k kr(5r H(t)5rrH(0) &+o(k ), (6)
where 5r H(t)=r H(t} (r H & and r —H(t) is the uth Cartesian component of the instantaneous position of the
H atom. The octahedral site of the H atom has cubic
symmetry; the mean position is a center of inversion symmetry
and each Cartesian axis is symmetric with the others.
Therefore F,(k, t)=1+k (5xH(t)5xH(0) &+o(k ) .
Under the conditions of the available experiment'
~ k ~
=4.9 A. Therefore, k ( 5x H & =0.8, and the approximation
of Eq. (8) is likely to be reasonable but deserves
checking. Figure 1 shows the time correlation functions
identified in Eqs. (5) and (8). On the 100 fs time scale associated
with the decay, these quantities are strongly
similar. The results for F, (k, t) for nonzero values of ~k~
were obtained by orienting k along a Cartesian axis but
averaging over all the vectors in the star of k. Since the
results obtained are not qualitatively changed by changes
of ~ k ~ in this regime, it is reasonable to assume that orientational
averaging also would not change the results qualitatively.
We note that on this time scale, these atomic
motions are strongly damped.

Fig. 2 over the same range and with approximately the
same resolution with which the experimental spectrum
are available. The experimental spectrum is shown in
Fig. 3. The center of each of these spectra is very close to
the center of the measured spectra. The experimental
spectrum also shows a shoulder (or perhaps a broad background)
extending to higher energy, as do the computed
results. However, this is considerably more prominent in significantly clouded if the function of Fig. 4 only were to
be compared with the measured spectrum. Preliminary
calculations which varied the mass of the impurity
verified that these computed spectra do, indeed, shift
with the square root of the solute mass, as expected.

The power spectrum of Fig. 4 also can provide the frequency
QH noted above. The determination of this frequency
allows us to test the description of the thermodynamic
properties afforded by Eq. (1). In particular, we
define a Sievert's law constant, k, (H), for hydrogen dissolution
by
ks(H)=lim„p(xH/~pH ),
where xH is the mole fraction of hydrogen (H) in the metal
and pH is the pressure of hydrogen gas (Hz) in the va-
2
por phase. We then inquire about the ratio
[ks(H)/k, (D)]. The difFerences of the gas phases, H2
versus D2, makes a very large contribution to this ratio.
This contribution can be obtained from textbook material.
' The nonclassical character of the atomic motion in
the inetal which is identified by Eq. (1) contributes a factor
of
mH mD exp 2 —,
' (PA'QH) =0.4 .
mD
This gives rise to an estimate of [ks(H)/ks(D)]=1. 1
+0.3. This is approximately 40% smaller than the experimental
value.

In view of the satisfactory agreement between the computed
and measured vibrational spectrum for the H im-computed and measured differential solubility of H versus
D indicates that the simplest description of the quantum
mechanics, Eq. (1), is not satisfactorily accurate for the
sytem under the present conditions. Ideas for numerically
exact calculation of such effects have been the focus of
recent research. Suitable basic approaches for these tasks
have been clearly articulated and successful applications
have been presently already. ' However, detailed implementations
differ with the details of the different problems
which have been considered. We expect to return to
this issue with subsequent work.


B. Equilibrium structure

The radial distribution functions obtained from these
calculations appear in Fig. 5. The expected and observed
features of the Pd-H radial distribution are considerably
broader than those of the Pd-Pd distribution. This is associated
with the above observation that the H atom vibrational
motion is a low-frequency, large-amplitude
motion compared to H vibration under typically covalent
interactions. The rms displacernent of the H atom which
characterizes the Debye-Wailer factor was given above
and compared with experimental values. An alternative
way of displaying the relatively large amplitude of the H
atom motions is given in Fig. 6. There the Pd-H potential
of mean force is plotted. This free energy surface is
remarkably slowly varying over a spatial region within
0.1 A of the expected crystallographic displacement of
1.945 A


IV. CONCLUSIONS

The embedded-atom model adopted here does a good
job of describing the H-Pd atomic forces probed by incoherent
inelastic neutron scattering. The results
highlight the fact that the H atom vibrations in PdH
solutions are low-frequency large-amplitude vibrations
relative to vibrations of H atoms in usua1 covalent interactions.
The rms displacement of the H atom from its pares
favorably with the available neutron-diffraction results.
The solubility differences between H and D are not
accurately described by the present calculation. This
likely due to the perturbative treatment of the quantummechanical
corrections to the thermodynamic properties
which has been tested here. In subsequent work, we expect
to study the solubility of these isotopes with numerical
path-integral methods for description of the
quantum-mechanical nature of the H motion under these
conditions.

here deserves emphasis. It has been argued that this
anharmonicity is the principal contribution to the anomalous
isotope dependence of the superconducting transition
temperature in PdH. ' Furthermore, atomic level
theoretical investigations of the phase transitions and
transport processes of hydrogen metal systems require an
accurate description on the interatomic forces not limited
to harmonic interactions. Most of the previous dynamical
calculations on PdH have focused on the development
of lattice-dynamical models from the measured
phonon-dispersion relations. ' Theoretical calculations
similar to the present work which test the accuracy of the
available electron gas models for forces among hydrogen
constituents at higher concentrations would be a natural
next step. Subsequent attention given to systems such as
TiH in which more complex metal behavior accompanies
and intrudes upon dissolution of the hydrogen
would also be helpful.
