1. FOREWORD 

Attempts to achieve low temperature nuclear fusion can be traced to the work of Paneth, 
Peters, and Tanberg in 1927 . Martin Fleischmann, who in his early career was a 
colleague of Paneth, teamed with Stanley Pons at the University of Utah to pursue this 
goal by the electrolysis of heavy water with a palladium cathode. Palladium is a metal 
which strongly absorbs hydrogen isotopes. The question they sought to answer was 
whether the internal pressure generated by this absorption would be sufficient to 
overcome the coulomb repulsion of deuterium nuclei. In 1989 they claimed success in 
fusing deuterium nuclei to form helium 
. Their main evidence for this claim was excess 
heat which was orders of magnitude higher than could be explained by any known 
chemical reaction. 

Great interest was generated by this claim, but most scientists who attempted to 
reproduce it were not successful. For example, about 200 scientists at Los Alamos 
National Laboratory attempted but only three claimed success 3. The interest of the 
mainstream scientific community waned, but scientists around the world who had success 
continued to pursue this research. For example, the Eighth International Conference on 
Cold Fusion (ICCF8) was held in Italy in May 2000. There were 41 participants from 
Italy, 40 from the USA, 24 from Japan, 12 from Russia, and smaller numbers from 14 
other countries 4. Of the 110 abstracts which were submitted for presentation, 77 were 
accepted. The proceedings of this conference contain much evidence (detection of 
helium, elemental transmutations, and excess heat) which should be proof enough that 
low temperature nuclear fusion is a reality. ICCF9 will be held in Beijing at Tsinghua 
University, which is one of the most prestigious universities in China, in 2002. 


2. LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 

Fig, 1. Effect of electrolysis in heavy water with a palladium cathode on isotopic ratios. 

Fig. 2. Effect of electrolysis in heavy water with a titanium cathode on isotopic ratios. 

Fig. 3. Seebeck envelope calorimeter results showing excess heat produced by 
electrolysis of heavy water with a titanium cathode. The standard deviation of the 
thermal power output is 17 mW. 

Fig. 4. Excess thermal power as a function of reduction in thickness of Ti cathodes by 
cold rolling, 


3. STATEMENT OF THE PROBLEM STUDIED 

Titanium, which strongly absorbs hydrogen isotopes, is an attractive low-cost alternative 
to palladium, which is currently the most costly noble metal. In fact, titanium forms TiH2 
(or TiD2) whereas palladium forms PdH (or PdD) which contain about half as much of 
the hydrogen isotopes as the titanium compounds. Our preliminary experiments indicated 
that an electrolytic cell with a titanium cathode ran at a temperature 4 C higher than a 
control cell of the same size containing a platinum cathode, even though the power input 
Calculations showed that the cell with the titanium cathode was producing about one watt 
excess thermal power compared with the control cell 5. This means that the 10 mg 
titanium cathode produced about 83,000 joules more energy than was consumed by 
electrolysis. This is far more energy than could be produced by any known chemical 
reaction. For example, the conversion of 10 mg of titanium to Ti02 would produce about 
190 joules, which is more than two orders of magnitude less than the observed output. 

The titanium cathode was examined before and after electrolysis with a scanning electron 
microscope (SEM), and microchemical analysis was performed with an energy dispersive 
spectrometer (EDS). New surface features which were not present before electrolysis 
were analyzed and found to contain unexpected elements (S, K, Ca, V, Cr, Fe, Ni, and 
Zn). The most likely source of these new elements is electroplating of impurities. 

However, this explanation is not satisfactory for several reasons: 

1. The most abundant metallic impurity in the electrolyte is Pt from the anode, and 
Pt deposits at a much lower potential than any of the unexpected elements which 
were actually observed. If electroplating was the source of the unexpected 
elements cited above, then Pt also should have been found. 


2. The titanium cathode erodes at the rate of about one atomic layer per second. This 
was determined from the loss of mass which occurred during electrolysis. It 
would be difficult to deposit any impurity when erosion is occurring at such a 
high rate. This is probably why Pt was not observed. 

3. The unexpected elements occur only in localized concentrations. It is not likely 
that such a distribution could be produced by electroplating. 

During the past three years we have continued our studies of the electrolysis of heavy 
water with palladium and titanium cathodes. The work on palladium cathodes was 
characterization by SEM, EDS, and secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS). Multiple 
cell experiments were performed, using titanium cathodes, to determine what factors are 
important in obtaining excess heat reproducibly. Improved calorimetry was employed to 
increase the accuracy of heat measurements. Neutron activation analysis (NAA) and 
inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICPMS) were performed in addition to 
SEM and EDS analysis. 

During this time period there were reports that radioactive elements deposited on the 
cathode could be rapidly transmuted into stable elements by the electrolysis of water 5. If 
true, this would be a very significant discovery. A new graduate student was interested in 
research on this topic, and he wrote his M.S. thesis on the results of his experiments. 


SUMMARY OF THE MOST IMPORTANT RESULTS 

A. There are changes in the isotopic ratios in both palladium and titanium 
cathodes after electrolysis in heavy water. For example, Fig.l (top) shows 
SIMS spectra taken from a Pd sample which had not been electrolyzed. 
The six stable isotopes occur in their expected relative ratios. After 
electrolysis for six minutes in heavy water, a Pd cathode made from the 
same batch shows isotopic inversions of I08Pd with I06Pd and IIOPd with 
104Pd, Fig.! (bottom). After electrolyzing a Pd cathode from the same 
batch in light water, the SIMS spectra showed no isotopic inversions 6. 
SIMS is a surface analytical technique. Our previous results showed that 
an isotopic inversion disappeared after sputtering about 0.3 ttm from the 
Pd surface, indicating that the inversion occurs only at the surface? 

Changes in the isotopic ratios for titanium after electrolysis in heavy 
water, obtained by ICPMS, are shown in Fig.2. This shows that the ratios 
of50Ti to each of the other stable isotopes is reduced after electrolysis by 
amounts ranging from 4 to 13%, which is an average over the bulk of the 
cathode 8. 

We realize that our claim of changes in isotopic ratios is extraordinary. 
Therefore, we have preserved our samples so that our results can be 
checked by any independent laboratory. 

B. In order to achieve more accurate calorimetric results, we acquired a 
Seebeck envelope calorimeter, which contains many thermocouples 
connected in series to measure the total heat output of a source contained 
in the inner cavity. This calorimeter was calibrated by using a cell with 
Pt electrodes and acidified light water. The calorimeter output signal 
varied linearly with power input to the electrolysis cell over the range of 
interest. Using a cell with a Pt anode, a Ti cathode, and acidified heavy 
water electrolyte, excess heat was observed when the calorimeter output 
signal significantly exceeded the calibration line at the same input power. 
Fig.3 shows an example of power output from a cell with a Ti cathode 
compared with the power input. The cell runs at constant current. 

Excess heat is generated constantly after 60 minutes, and the 
amount gradually increases to the steady state value of about 130 m W 
+/- 17 m W after about 200 minutes. This cell gave statistically 
significant excess heat for about 82 hours, after which it was stored for 
future study. 

C. Multiple cell experiments were used to determine if reproducible results 
could be achieved 9, Seven cells were connected in series. In one of these 
both the anode and the cathode were platinum, and in the others the 
anode was Pt and the cathode was Ti. Another cell of the same type was 
used to monitor ambient temperature. All cells had double walls, with a 
sensor to measure temperature located in the air space between the walls. 

High purity titanium 0.5 mm thick, in the as received (cold rolled) 
condition was used for the cathodes. Experiments with titanium 
cathodes in the as received condition yielded excess heat in four of nine 
cases. In an attempt to improve reproducibility, the effect of additional 
cold rolling on excess heat production was studied. With the 
Ti thickness reduced from 0.5 to 0.4 mm (20% reduction), it was found 
that 12 of 21 gave statistically significant excess heat. The magnitude 
of this excess thermal power varied from 0.1 to 0.5 watt, and the duration 
was about 20 hours. Failure occurred due to erosion, which is probably 
caused by high internal stresses produced when TiD2 forms on the cathode 
surface. At 50% reduction in thickness, four of 11 cells gave excess heat, 
and the maximum excess thermal power was about 0.2 watt. Statistically 
significant excess heat was obtained in only one of nine experiments using 
cathodes which had been cold rolled to more than 50% reduction in 
thickness. Fig. 4 summarizes the data on excess thermal power as a function 
of reduction in thickness by cold rolling. 

D. Professor Emeritus H. Kozima, Physics Dept., Shizuoka University, 
Japan, has developed a theory which is based on thermal neutrons from 
the ambient background which are trapped in the surface atoms of certain 
solids. In the excited state, these neutrons may hop to other nuclei and 
catalyze fusion reactions. Since he joined our laboratory in Sept. 2000, he 
has had four papers concerning refinements of his theory accepted for 
publication. 


5. LIST OF ALL PUBLICATIONS AND TECHNICAL REPORTS 

1. D. S. Silver and J. Dash, "Surface Studies of Palladium after Interaction with 
Hydrogen Isotopes", Proc. 7th Int. Conf. on Cold Fusion, pp. 351-355, 
Vancouver, B.C., April 1998 (Published by Eneco, Salt Lake City, 1998). 

2. M.J. Klopfenstein and J. Dash, "Thermal Imaging during Electrolysis of 
Heavy Water with a Titanium Cathode", ibid, pp. 98-102. 

3. D. Silver and J. Dash, " SEM and EDS Characterization of Palladium 
Cathodes after Electrolysis in Light and Heavy Water", Proc. Conf. on 
Microscopy and Microanalysis, pp. 596, 597, Portland, OR, Aug. 1999 
(Springer, 1999). 

4. J. Warner and J. Dash, "SEM and EDS Characterization of Titanium 
Cathodes before and after Electrolysis in Heavy Water", ibid, pp. 598, 599. 

5. J. Warner and J. Dash,"Heat rroduced during the Electrolysis of D20 with 
Titanium Cathodes", Proc. 8t Int. Conf. on Cold Fusion, pp. 161-167, Italy, 
May 2000 (Published by Italian Physical Society, 2000). 

6. G. Goddard, J. Dash, and S. Frantz, "Characterization of Uranium 
Codeposited with Hydrogen on Nickel Cathodes", Trans. American Nuclear 
Society 83, 376-378 (2000). 

7. H. Kozima, J. Warner, G. Goddard, and J. Dash, "Reality of the Super 
Nuclear Reaction in Metal Hydrides and Deuterides 
Verification by 
Numerical Calculations for PdH(D)", accepted for publication in Fusion 
Technology. 

8. H. Kozima, "Neutron Bands in Metal Hydrides 
Effects of Occluded 
Hydrogen on Nuclear Reactions in Solids", accepted for publication in 
Fusion Technology. 

9. H. Kozima, K. Yoshimoto, H. Kudoh, M. Fujii, and M. Ohta, "Analysis 

ofZn and Excess Heat Generation in Pd/H_{2}(D_{2}) System by the TNCF 
Model, accepted for publication in J. New Energy. 


10. H. Kozima, M. Ohta, M. Fujii, K. Arai, and H. Kudoh, " Possible 
Explanation of4He Production in a Pd/D_{2} System by the TNCF 
Model", accepted for publication in Fusion Technology. 

11. D. Silver, "Surface Studies of Metals after Interaction with Hydrogen 
Isotopes", Ph.D. Dissertation, Portland State University (1998). 


12. J. Warner, "Observation of Heat Produced and Chemical Changes 
Caused by Electrolysis of Titanium with Heavy Water", M.S. Thesis, 
Portland state University (1998). 

13. G. Goddard, "Characterization of Uranium Codeposited with Hydrogen 
on Nickel Cathodes", M.S. Thesis, Portland State University (2001). 


7. BIBLIOGRAPHY 

F. Close, "Too Hot to Handle" (Princeton University Press, 1991), pp. 19-21. 

M. Fleischmann and S. Pons, "Electrolytically Induced Nuclear Fusion of 
Deuterium", 1. Electroanalytical Chern. 261, 301 (1989). 

E. Storms, Private Communication. 
4. F. Scaramuzzi, Proc. 8th Int. Conf. on Cold Fusion, pp. XVII, XVIII, Italy, 
May 2000 (Published by Italian Physical Society, 2000). 

G. Miley, "Scientific Feasibility Study of Low-Energy Nuclear Reactions 
for Nuclear Waste Amelioration", Proposal No. 99-0222, submitted to DOE 
Nuclear Energy Research Initiative, 1999. 

D. S. Silver, "Surface Studies of Metals after Interaction with Hydrogen 
Isotopes", Ph.D. dissertation, Portland State University, 1998, pp. 79-81. 

7. J. Dash, "Chemical Changes and Excess Heat Caused by Electrolysis with 
H2S04 - D20 Electrolyte", Proc. 6th Int. Conf. on Cold Fusion 2, 477(1996, 
Japan). 

M. F. Klopfenstein and 1. Dash, "Thermal Imaging during Electrolysis of 
Heavy Water with a Ti Cathode", Proc. 7th Int. Conf. on Cold Fusion, p. 98, 
Vancouver, B.C., April 1998 (Published by Eneco, Salt Lake City, 1998). 

9. J. Warner, "Observation of Heat Produced and Chemical Changes Caused by 
Electrolysis of Titanium with Heavy Water", M.S. Thesis, Portland State 
University (1998). 


FIGURES

Figure 1 .. SIMS profile of the six palladium isotopes for a region of the palladium sample 
not electrolyzed (top). and a region of the six minute heayy water electrolyzed sample 
(bottom). Note the isotopic inversions of Pd108 with Pd106, and Pd110 with Pd104• for the 
latter sample. 
 
Fig. 2. Effect of electrolysis in heavy water with a titanium cathode on isotopic ratios. 
(I) 
 
Fig. 3. Seebeck envelope calorimeter results showing excess heat produced by 
electrolysis of heavy water with a titanium cathode. The standard deviation of the 
thermal power output is 17 m W. 

Fig. 4. Excess thermal power as a function of reduction in thickness of Ti cathodes by 
cold rolling, 
