Introduction.

Nuclear reaction rates at very low projectile energies, far below the
Coulomb barrier, are sensitive to the electronic properties of target materials. The electrons
surrounding the reacting nuclei can increase the tunneling probability through the Coulomb
barrier leading to an enhancement of nuclear reaction rates at low projectile energies. The
electron screening eﬀect was originally discussed due to its importance for dense astrophysi-
cal plasmas, where nuclear reaction rates can be increased by many orders of magnitudes [1].
Experimentally, the screening eﬀect could be veriﬁed only ﬁfteen years ago in gas target exper-
iments [2] by an observation of an exponential-like increase of the measured cross-section for
decreasing projectile energies compared to the cross-section expected for bare nuclei. Theoret-
ically, this eﬀect was described [3] by applying a conception of the electron screening energy
resulting from the gain in the electron binding energy between the initially separated atoms
and the ﬁnally united atom. In the experiments, the screening energy could be treated as an
energy shift of the kinetic energy of the reacting nuclei causing an increase of the penetration
probability through the Coulomb barrier.

Table I – Electron screening energies determined for various target materials.

The fusion reactions 2H(d, p)3H and 2H(d, n)3He are especially suitable for the study of
such eﬀects, due to their relatively high cross-sections and low Coulomb barrier. Recently [4],
we have shown that the screening eﬀect investigated for the d + d fusion reactions in metallic
environments is by about a factor of 10 stronger than that observed for the gas target [5] and
up to a factor of 4 larger than the theoretical predictions [6]. Such ﬁndings were also conﬁrmed
by results of other groups [7–10]. From a theoretical point of view, the experiments performed
with deuterized metals provide information about the electron screening not only due to bound
electrons as is the case for gas-phase experiments, but also about a contribution arising from
free metallic electrons. The latter gives us a possibility to test models of the electron screening
based on the dielectric function theory which describes the electronic dynamics in solids [11]
as well as in dense astrophysical plasmas [28]. Here, we compare our previously published [4]
and some new experimental data with the results of an improved theoretical approach includ-
ing the self-consistent correction of the dielectric function. This enables us to determine a
reliable deuteron-deuteron potential within a host metal also for large distances corresponding
to very low deuteron energies. Applying the form of the screened potential, we predict some
consequences for nuclear reactions taking place in metallic environments at energies down to
room temperature. By means of the theoretical calculations, we shall compare our experimen-
tal results achieved at higher energies using a classical accelerator technique with the data
obtained in so-called cold-fusion experiments, i.e. in the heavy-water electrolysis [12,13].


Experimental procedure. –

The experimental results obtained for C, Al, Zr and Ta have
already been presented previously [4, 14, 15]. The experiment with Pd has been performed
analogously, so only an outline of the experimental procedure will be given here. The D+
and D+
2 beams from the electrostatic accelerator of energies ranging between 5 and 60 keV
were magnetically analyzed, focused and impinged on a Pd foil. Diﬀerently to the previous
experiment, where the targets were implanted to large deuteron densities corresponding ap-
proximately to the chemically stable stoichiometry (see table I), the implantation process of
the Pd foil was interrupted at a relatively small deuteron density in order to study fusion
reactions in the metallic environment possessing a small number of crystal-lattice defects and
reducing the number of possible deuterium bubbles resulting from long-term irradiation. The
reaction products (protons, tritons and 3He particles) were detected by four Si-detectors lo-
cated in the reaction plane at backward angles. Since the thickness of all targets was much
larger than the projectile range, the experimental results can be expressed by the thick-target
yield Y (E). Here we restrict ourselves only to the reaction 2H(d, p)3H for which the total
thick-target yield was obtained by integrating the proton spectral line over the experimen-
tally determined angular distribution [4]. An exponential-like enhancement of the total yields
observed in the experiments for decreasing projectile energies can be described using the con-
ception of the electron screening energy Ue [3]. According to this, a reduction of the height
of the Coulomb barrier corresponds to an increase of the kinetic energy of the reacting nu-

Fig. 1 – Screening function calculated with and without the local ﬁeld correction (LFC) (left) and
the corresponding eﬀective screening energies (right) obtained for PdD.

clei in the expression for the barrier penetration. Consequently, a formula for the screened
cross-section reads as follows:

Here S(Ecm) is the astrophysical S-factor determined for the bare nuclei taken at the center-
of-mass energy Ecm. EG = 986 keV is the Gamow energy. In the case of Ue = 0, one obtains
the standard relation between the cross-section and the S-factor. Note that eq. (1) diﬀers
from the analogous formula used in the previous works [3,4,7–9], where the screening energy
correction has been incorrectly applied also to the wavelength dependence of the cross-section
being inversely proportional to the square root of E.
At the very low deuteron energies
investigated here this proper correction is signiﬁcant.

Since the bare nuclei S-factor is very well known from the precision measurements per-
formed on the gas target [16], the experimentally determined enhancement of thick-target
yields can be described by ﬁtting the screening energy Ue. The results obtained for diﬀerent
targets are presented in table I. A clear target material dependence of the screening energy
can be observed.


Theoretical approach —target material dependence. –

The screening eﬀect in metals can
be described in analogy to the strongly coupled astrophysical plasmas. We apply here the
so-called dielectric-function method [11] which allows to treat the electron screening as a
static polarization of the metallic medium induced by the positively charged deuterons. The
screened Coulomb potential V (r) is a solution of the Poisson equation and can be expressed
as a Fourier transform:

where ϵν(q) and ϵc(q) are the static, wave-number–dependent, dielectric functions resulting
from quasi-free valence electrons and from bound metallic core electrons, respectively. Dif-
ferent from our previous calculations [17], the elementary charge e is multiplied by a self-
consistent charge form-factor ϕ(q) for deuterons with the screening electrons in the Thomas-
Fermi approximation [11,18]: ϕ(q) = 1 − z + zq2/(q2 + k2TF). Here, the Thomas-Fermi wave
number k2 TF = 6πe2n/EF has been used; n and EF are the electron number density and the
Fermi energy, respectively. The number z corresponds to the fraction of electrons bound to
deuterons and is for metals close to unity. Since we are interested in the evaluation of the
strongest possible screening eﬀect, we uniformly set z = 1 for all target materials. In the
absence of screening ϵν ≡ ϵc ≡ 1 and z = 0, V (r) reduces to the bare Coulomb potential
(Φ(r) ≡ 1). The response of the valence electron gas to an external ﬁeld is given by the
dielectric function [19]:

where v(q) = 4πe2/q2 and P(q) is the static Lindhard RPA polarizability [20]. G(q) is the
static local ﬁeld correction (LFC) that takes into account the short-range electron correlation
and the exchange interaction [19]. Similar to [17], we apply for core electron polarization
the dielectric function proposed in [21].

The screening function Φ(r) calculated with and without LFC by a numeric integration of eq. (2) is presented in ﬁg. 1 together with the simple
exponential function exp[−r/a] corresponding to the Bohr screening. The diﬀerences between
both curves are especially visible for larger distances where the numeric potential becomes
negative and shows characteristic Friedel oscillations. The attractive part of the potential
is strong enough to build the hydrogen molecule. Similar results were obtained within the
dielectric-function formalism [18] and the density functional theory [22].
The theoretical results were conﬁrmed by observation of the dihydrogen complexes in many metals [23]. For
distances small compared to the screening length a, the Coulomb potential is reduced by a
polarization screening energy Upol = e2/a which is used for calculating the screened cross-
section according to eq. (1).

In the metallic lattice, besides electrons also positive ions can contribute to the screening
of the Coulomb barrier between reacting nuclei. This eﬀect, called cohesion screening, can
be calculated in analogy to the dense astrophysical plasmas within the ion-sphere model of
Salpeter [1]. We have proposed to use a more realistic model [17] based on the universal ion-ion
potential introduced by Biersack [24]. This potential describes the interaction between light as
well as heavy ions at low energies with very good accuracy. Since the potential energy of two
deuterons in the ﬁeld of a host metal atom is larger than that of the helium atom produced in
the fusion reaction, one obtains a gain in potential energy. As cohesion screening energy Ucoh
we calculate the potential energy gain resulting from the surrounding 12 host atoms. The
cohesion screening energy depends on the distance between the deuteron and the host atoms
and on the crystal structure. Since we are interested only in a rough estimation of this eﬀect,
we assume for all materials the same fcc crystal structure with a distance to the host atoms
of 1 ˚A. The theoretical values for Ue, being a sum of the polarization and cohesion screening
energies Upol + Ucoh, calculated for all target materials investigated are presented in table I.


Extrapolation towards lower energies. –

For even lower projectile energies, the eﬀect of
the electron screening cannot longer be represented by an energy-independent Ue. We can
introduce, however, an energy-dependent eﬀective screening energy Ueﬀ which ensures that
the barrier penetration factors, calculated in the frame of the WKB approximation with the
screened potential V (r) and that applied by eq. (1), are equal to each other. This condition
reads as follows:

where R1 and R2 are the classical turning points in the WKB expression, and M is the
deuteron mass. The method proposed here allows the calculation of the cross-section according

Fig. 2 – Left: energy dependence of the cross-section (full lines) and of the thick-target yield (dashed
lines) for the 2H(d, p)3H reaction calculated for two diﬀerent screening energies, 300 eV (upper lines)
and 150 eV (lower lines). Right: the nuclear reaction rate in dependence on the electron screening
energy. The calculations are performed for Pd.

to eq. (1) also at very low projectile energies. The eﬀective screening energy Ueﬀ, evaluated
for Pd, is shown in ﬁg. 1. There are two well-deﬁned limits: at high energy (Ecm > 1 keV) and
at low energy (Ecm < 10 eV). The ratio between the low-energy and the high-energy value
amounts to about 0.58, being nearly independent of the actual deuteron-deuteron potential.
The total screening energy is the sum Ueﬀ+Ucoh, the value of which taken at the zero projectile
energy U0 corresponds to 0.78 of the high-energy limit Ue.

Since the eﬀective screening energy is a slowly varying function of energy, it is simple
to deduce the behaviour of the cross-section at very low projectile energies. Using eq. (1),
we obtain σscr(Ecm) ∝ 1/√Ecm arising solely from the wavelength dependence of the cross-
section. Similarly, we get an expression for the thick-target yield: Yscr(Ecm) ∝ ln (Ecm/E0),
where it was taken into account that the stopping power at very low energies, being composed
of the nuclear and the electronic contributions, is proportional to the square root of the energy.
E0 is the minimum energy of the deuterons in the target before they are captured in the crystal
lattice, corresponding to the activation energy for deuteron diﬀusion in the target material.
In the case of thermal equilibrium, a useful quantity for a comparison with experimental data
is the nuclear reaction rate:

Here vrel is the relative velocity between reacting deuterons, M is the deuteron mass and N
denotes the deuteron density of the target. The reaction rate for projectile energies much
smaller than the screening energy is dependent only on U0 and not on Ecm. Therefore, no
assumption about the distribution of the deuteron velocity is necessary. The cross-section and
thick-target yield for Pd involving the realistic stopping power values [25] and the eﬀective
screening energy are depicted in ﬁg. 2. Applying eq. (5) we can also evaluate the reaction
rate in dependence on the screening energy U0. In ﬁg. 2 a comparison with the experimental
reaction rates determined in heavy-water electrolysis experiments is presented. The neutron
production rates measured by Jones et al. [12] are by a factor 1010 smaller than the nuclear
fusion rates determined by Fleischmann and Pons [13] from the heat excess release.


Discussion and conclusions. –

The experimental electron screening energies determined
for ﬁve diﬀerent target materials are presented in table I together with the results of theoreti-
cal calculations. The negative Ue value for the amorphous-carbon target arises probably from
the strong chemical bonding between deuterium and carbon atoms (ca. 5 eV) and a system-
atic uncertainty in the beam energy. The experimental screening energies for heavier metals
(Zr, Pd, Ta) are of the same order, 300 eV.

The screening energy determined for Ta by the LUNA Collaboration [7] (309 ± 12 eV)
and for Pd by the Japanese group [9] (310 ± 50 eV) are very close to our values, whereas the
corresponding Pd value obtained by the LUNA Collaboration is much larger and amounts to
800±90 eV. The lower Ue values for Al and Zr targets reported by the LUNA Collaboration [8]
can be due to the enhanced oxidation of these materials under high-vacuum conditions and
ion impact [4,26]. This was also conﬁrmed by an increase of the screening energies for Al and
some other metals in the next experiment of this group [10], where the target surfaces were
cleaned by Kr sputtering immediately before the deuteron incidence. However, in a vacuum
of order 10−8 mbar the targets can re-oxidize within a few minutes (see, for example, [27]).
This eﬀect depends very strongly on the chemical reactivity of the target material and can
be, on the other hand, reduced by the sputtering process of the target surface during the
deuteron irradiation, which is, however, also target material dependent. Thus, the small value
of Ue = 80 ± 20 eV obtained for Zr and some other metals [10], being signiﬁcantly smaller
than both our experimental and theoretical values, might be due to the re-oxidation process
of the target. Since the main goal of the present paper is a theoretical one, we refer for a
detailed discussion of experimental results to our forthcoming paper [28]. Certainly, future
experiments performed under ultra-high vacuum conditions will allow to clear the discrepancy.

The theoretical calculations describe the material dependence of the screening energy, ob-
served in our experiment, qualitatively correctly. Whereas the screening energy for C is close to
zero, the value for Al is slightly smaller than those calculated for the heavier metals. A strong
variation of the screening energies observed in [8,10] for metallic targets cannot be theoreti-
cally explained. The main contribution to the theoretical values is provided by polarization of
the free valence electrons, although the contribution of bound electrons of the host atoms (core
polarization) cannot be neglected [17]. The slight increase of Ue with the atomic number re-
sults mainly from the cohesion contribution. However, the absolute values of the theoretically
calculated Ue are low by a factor of two compared with our experimental results. Including the
self-consistent correction and the full wave number dependence of the dielectric function leads
to lower screening energies than those determined within the simpliﬁed theory [17]. No reason
for such a large discrepancy between theoretical and experimental values has been found so
far. Even if a possible contribution of the channeling eﬀect to the experimentally determined
Ue were taken into account —in the case of Ta much smaller than 100 eV [15]— the diﬀer-
ence between experiment and theory remains large. Therefore, the calculations (ﬁg. 2) of the
cross-section and the thick-target yield at extremely low energies were carried out with the ex-
perimental value of the screening energy by applying the theoretically predicted energy depen-
dence of Ue. The resulting thick-target yield at the smallest projectile energies cannot explain
the observation of the neutron emission at room temperature reported in [12,29]. Even if we
take into account that the slow projectile deuterons win kinetic energy due to adsorption at the
palladium surface (ca. 4 eV [30]) and due to the electron capture in the bulk (13.6 eV), the theo-
retical neutron yield remains by a factor of about 1010 smaller than the reaction rates reported
by Jones et al. [12]. However, the situation changes completely if we assume that the target
deuterons move. Irradiation of the palladium target during the electrolysis can lead to strong
lattice oscillations in the surface region of the target, causing, in turn, a quasi-free movement
of target deuterons. This mechanism seems to be plausible for Pd, where the activation energy
for deuteron diﬀusion amounts only to 0.15 eV [30]. In this case we can use eq. (5) for the es-
timation of nuclear reaction rates. In ﬁg. 2, the reaction rates calculated for diﬀerent eﬀective
screening energies U0 are compared to the neutron production rate of Jones [12] and to the heat
excess rate postulated by [13]. The neutron production rate [12] requires U0 = 220 eV which
corresponds to a screening energy Ue of about 280 eV at the high-energy limit in agreement
with our experiments. On the contrary, the energy production rate [13] demands U0 = 620 eV
(790 eV at high energies) being clearly outside our experimental constraints.

Summarizing, the improved dielectric function theory allows for a qualitative description
of the observed target material dependence of the screening energy; the absolute values are,
however, by a factor of 2 smaller than the experimental values. Applying the eﬀective screen-
ing energy approach, cross-sections and thick-target yields could be calculated for projectile
energies much lower than those achieved in our accelerator experiments. An agreement with
the neutron production rates at room temperature reported by [12] could be obtained only un-
der the assumption of quasi-free moving deuterons in the target lattice during the heavy-water
electrolysis.


REFERENCES

Salpeter F. E., Austr. J. Phys., 7 (1954) 373.
Engstler S. et al., Phys. Lett. B, 202 (1988) 179.
Assenbaum H. J., Langanke K. and Rolfs C., Z. Phys. A, 327 (1987) 461.
Czerski K. et al., Europhys. Lett., 54 (2001) 449.
Greife U. et al., Z. Phys. A, 351 (1995) 107.
Ichimaru S., Rev. Mod. Phys., 65 (1993) 252.
Raiola F. et al., Eur. Phys. J. A, 13 (2002) 377.
Raiola F. et al., Phys. Lett. B, 547 (2002) 193.
Kasagi J. et al., J. Phys. Soc. Jpn., 71 (2002) 2281.
Bonomo C. et al., Nucl. Phys. A, 719 (2003) 37c.
Pines D., Elementary Excitations in Solids (Benjamin, New York) 1963.
Jones S. E. et al., Nature, 338 (1989) 737.
Fleischmann M. and Pons S., J. Electroanal. Chem., 261 (1989) 301.
Huke A., PhD Thesis, Technische Universit¨at Berlin (2002).
Czerski K. et al., Nucl. Instrum. Methods B, 193 (2002) 183.
Brown R. E. and Jarmie N., Phys. Rev. C, 41 (1990) 1391.
Czerski K., Huke A. and Heide P., Nucl. Phys. A, 719 (2003) 52c.
Ichimaru S. et al., J. Phys. Soc. Jpn., 59 (1990) 1333.
Moroni S., Ceperley D. M. and Senatore G., Phys. Rev. Lett., 75 (1995) 689.
Grosso G. and Parravicini G. P., Solid State Physics (Academic Press) 2000.
Penn D. E., Phys. Rev., 128 (1962) 2093.
Tomanek D. et al., Phys. Rev. B, 43 (1991) 4699.
Jessopand P. G. and Morris R. J., Coord. Chem. Rev., 121 (1992) 155.
Ziegler J. F., Biersack J. P. and Littmark U., The Stopping and Ranges of Ions in Solids
(Pergamon Press, New York) 1985.
Ziegler J. F. and Biersack J. P., code SRIM, http://www.srim.org.
Huke A., Czerski K. and Heide P., Nucl. Phys. A, 719 (2003) 279c.
Czerski K. et al., Nucl. Instrum. Methods B, 225 (2004) 72.
Huke A., Czerski K. and Heide P., to be published.
De Ninno A. et al., Europhys. Lett., 9 (1989) 221.
You J. H. et al., Phys. Rev. B, 43 (1991) 7293.
