Introduction

Since 1989, in various countries around the world, continuous efforts have been
done to investigate the nature of the excess heat found in electrochemical
experiments of loading palladium or palladium alloys by deuterium. Five years
about of such as experiments carried out by several groups, by using different
techniques and procedures indicate that the heat power excess findings, up to 3.7
kW/cm3 of Pd (1), cannot be attributed to artifacts and their magnitude appears
well beyond the power that any expected chemical process could release. If
adequate protocols are used, heat generation is found and quite definite progress
Experimental
has been made towards its reproducibility though it is still difficult to adequately
control its onset, duration and magnitude. Because these features are the primary
conditions for developing any type of technologically exploitable energyproducing
device, efforts for improving them are in progress, expecially by
private companies, mostly in Japan.
On the side of nuclear ashes recovery, the overall picture is more intriguing. At
present time one thing is very well confirmed: the generation rate of neutrons
and tritium nuclei, coming from the d,d reaction channels, thought as
occurring in plasma physics, are of several order of magnitude lower, if
compared with the rate values expected from heat power excesses measured by
calorimetry. Therefore, in condensed matter, other nudear byproducts of d,d
reaction have to be invoked and searched. In this two-body reaction, only
another channel can exist: the 4He channel. Since the beginning, various
measurements (2-8) to detect 4He both in Pd cathodes and in the gas phase
escaping from the electrochemical cells were reported but only a few of them are
accounted for in detail. Up to now only one electrochemical cells experiment has
been reported (3) where evidence is given of heat excess roughly correlated with
4He measured in the gas phase. The air contamination which could have
possibly occurred in this experiment was later discussed (5). Gas loading
experiments in a high vacuum assembly have clearly shown the release of 4He
when deuterium is confined in Pd between blocking interfaces (6).
From the theoretical point of view, there are at least two great problems to solve
for explaining this experimental scenario: i. Coulomb barrier for d,d reaction
between low energy nuclei; ii. the energy release to Pd lattice of the a-particle
produced. In terms of plasma physics, for both these problems there is not a
solution. On the other hand these problems have been attacked with promising
results by some theories (9-12). Their main feature is the attempt to overcome
the schemes of the high energy physics believed to be not fully apt to treat a
different physical situation such as that of the condensed matter.
All this is a bird-view emerging from four International Conferences (13-16),
specialized International Meetings (17-18) and several hundreds of publications
on Journals.

Starting from 1989, our group, where competences of physical chemistry and
nuclear physics are present, is with continuity involved in making multicell
experiments providing calorimetric and nuclear (neutrons, tritium, 4He,
gammas) measurements as well as a little bit of Materials Science applied to Pd
cathodes preparation (19-27). Scope of the present paper is to show a part of the
results obtained in the last multicell experiment in which the feature of the
quantitative measurement of 4He was added.


Experimental 

Overview 
The basic idea in designing our experimental set-up was to have a multicell 
system, up to ten equal cells, in which the unique difference among them was in 
the cathode in terms of material or geometry or preparation. One or more cells 
can be blank cells having the cathode made of a material not D (H) absorbing 
such as Pt or Au or made of Pd but in a D free electrolyte. All the cells are 
connected in series and electrolysis is carried out in galvanostatic mode (each cell 
can be excluded or inserted at any time in the electrical series circuit by a home- 
made device controlled in manual or by computer mode). This allows the rate of 
all the electrochemical processes be the_same in each cell. This condition 
produces a certain number of important facts related to the calorimetry; as an 
example, the flow-rate of the electrolysis products, D2 (g) and 02 (g), is, according 
to the Faraday's law, equal in each cells so that the heat transported by the 
escaping gases and the heat necessary to saturate the gases themselves by D20 
(H20) are also the same in each cell provided the temperature of the solution be 
the same. 

Because each cell is a non-adiabatic calorimeter, it is important that the way the 
heat is exchanged with the sorroundings is the same for all the cells. As expected, 
this has to occur mostly through the conductive path localized in the cell glass 
wall between the eletrolyte solution and the thermostated stream of circulating 
water. This is obtained by positioning all the cells simmetrically in a torus-
shaped bath thermostated by circulating water kept at constant temperature 
(generally 21.0 ± 0.1 °C) by a high quality thermostat. The room temperature is 
maintained close to this value. 
The torus (50 cm outer diameter and 30 cm innermost diameter) is contained in 
a large neutron counter designed by us and manufactured by Jomar-Canberra, 
Los Alamos (see below). 

To easier understand what is monitored, what is done in each cell and how the 
signal are processed, we report in Fig. 1 the complete flow-chart (24). 

Figure 1 Flow-chart of the operations performed on each cell 

5To be correct this is exactly true when the rate of D (H) absorpion by the cathode is zero. For 
practical purposes, this condition is fulfilled quite soon after the starting of electrolysis
 
All the cells are treated according to this flow chart. As it is shown in figure 2, 
our cells are open-type cells with external recombination. The external 
recombinator joined to the D2 (H2) separator is an efficient D2 (H2) cutting system 
(see below). 

4He measurement by a magnetic type mass spectrometer (28) is not an on-line 
measurement and the gas line is sampled discontinuously by filling a 500 ml 
steinless steel (SS) cylinder. At sampling stage, as it will be shown later on, the 
gas composition is given by N2 with D2 (H2), 02 and D20 (H20) traces and 4He if 
any. At certain stage of the experiment 20Ne measurements have been initiated 
as a marker of a supposed air contamination. 
In the followings, we shall describe, except for the 4He measurement procedure 
reported elsewhere (28), the single parts of the experimental set-up as well as the 
adopted procedures, making use of what was already reported (24-26) while 
describing in details the new features and the reliability of the various methods 
adopted. 


Electrochemical Cells and Calorimetry 

i. Electrochemical cell. 

The present most recent version of the electrochemical cell is reported in Fig. 2. 
This cell was modified with respect to the previous version (26) essentially to 
make it impervious to the air contamination in view of 4He measurements. In 
fact, particular care has been reserved to all the feedthroughs in the cap in 
making them tight by high precision machining of the crossing holes as well as 
in selecting the feedthrough material. Nylon 66 or SS tubes were adopted for the 
lines because, as we tested (28), they are not 4He permeable. Connections in the 
lines were done by Swagelock fittings and where this was not possible, as in the 
case of SS-Pyrex joints, we made them by soldering SS tube and Pyrex by epoxy 
resin adhesives (of the types used in high vacuum technology). To carry 4He up 
to the sampling cylinder, due to the deuterium cutting system , we have to use a 
stream of N2 coming from a LN2 tank. This ensures a practical null background 
of 4He (28). 

The cell geometry (inner diameter 22 mm x 245 mm height) was designed to 
maximize the heat transfer in the radial direction by taking also into account the 
combined effect of the carrier and electrolysis gases bubbling which jointly allow 
the thermal gradient to be localized on the plane orthogonal to the z-axis of the 
cell. The effective volume of the cell to be filled with the electrolyte solution is 
about 53 ml. Small deviations from this value may exist from cell to cell if the 
cathodes are different in size. 

Three K-type thermocouples are present in the cell to measure the temperature 
of the cathode, solution and just outside the cell in a massive copper ring 
immersed in the thermostated bath. Automatic and computer controlled 
refilling of D20 (H20) is operated by the liquid sensor level positioned in the 
lateral tube. 

To ensure a good and permanent coaxial positioning of the electrodes, both the 
cathode and anode are partially inserted in a properly machined Teflon piece 
which also acts as N2 scrubber in its bottom part. 

The anode is made of a 1 mm diameter Pt wire shaped as coil having 12 mm 
inner diameter and height comparable to that of the cathode. 

Figure 2  Scheme of the electrochemical cell 

The electrolyte solution is 0.2 M solution of LiOD in 99.99% D20 (from ISOTEC, 
USA) at low tritium content (= 1Bq/m1 or 60 dpm/ml). The ICPAES (Inductively 
Coupled Plasma Atomic Emission Spectroscopy) analysis of the starting solution 
did not detect any alkaline or heavy metal above the detection limit which is 
generally 5_ 10 ppb. 

In Table I are reported some of the features of the cells tested in this experiment. 
All the Pd cathodes were prepared starting from Johnson & Matthey (UK) rods. 

Table I. Details of the electrochemical cells used in this experiment 

ii . Calorimetry:
The calorimetric excess heat measurements are based on the comparison of the 
actual value of temperature of the solution at a given input power with the 
calibration curve. The calibration curve is obtained by increasing or decreasing in 
step-fashion the input power. This can be done either in thermal mode, by the 
inner heater, or in electrochemical mode by using Au or Pt cathodes exactly in 
the same conditions in which the experiment is subsequently carried out. A 
detailed discussion about those procedures has been already reported in literature 
(25-26), therefore we limit ourselves to give in Table II the calibration curves 
equations for the cell used in this experiment. 

Table II. Calibration curves: Pin  = (ai ± Aai) + (bi ± Abi)ATi 

All the curves are practically straight-lines with high correlation factor r having 
the general equation form as: Pin  = (ai ± Aai) + (bi ± Abi)ATi where 
AT, = (T, -  
(Tib  - TA with Ts  and Ttb, respectively, the temperature of the 
solution and of the thermostated bath just outside the cell and measured in the 
copper ring. n and T are the respective values of Ts  and Ttb kept at Pin  =0. Pin  is 
the input power equal to IxV or Ix (V - Vth) depending on whether the cell is 
powered in thermal or electrochemical mode. Vth = AH°/2F is the 
thermoneutral potential being AEI° the enthalpy of decomposition of D20 (H20) 
and F the Faraday constant. The adopted value of Vth for D20 is 1.5367 V (29). Vin 
and I are, respectively, the electrical potential difference at leads read closest to 
the heating resistor, when in thermal mode, or electrodes, when in 
electrochemical mode and current measured through the voltage drop at leads of 
a high precision 100 inS2 resistor. The overall uncertainty in measuring Pin  is 
0.01%. The heat power excess, Pexc,  of  a 
where ATi is now the value measured in the experiment. The overall error on 
Pexc  has been evaluated to be less than ±10% (25). The minimum heat power 
excess detectable is given by P:.'", 
°C, is the minimum temperature change appreciable by the K-type 
thermocouples used. In Table II, the Pn", column was calculated assuming LIATi = 
0.15 °C. Note that due to the definition of ATi, the systematic error on this 
quantity is practically zero. 

The energy balance of such a calorimeter during a calibration input power step is 
given by: 
given cell i, is given by: 

where the four terms on the right side represent, respectively, the rate of 
enthalpy change of the solution, the rate of heat transfer from solution to the 
thermostated bath by conduction through the Pyrex wall, the rate of heat transfer 
by radiation to the thermostated bath and rate of heat transfer from solution to 
the gases (produced by electrolysis + N2 carrier) escaping from the cell and 
saturated with D20 (H20) at the temperature of solution. Consult Appendix A 
for the meaning of symbols in Eqn. 2. Due to the continuous heat transfer to the 
thermostated bath, ATi, contrarily to an adiabatic calorimeter (1), is generally 
below 15 °C, and therefore also the vapor pressure of D20 (H20) is low with 
 respect to the atmospheric pressure and the term  
p(t)  
2x10-2. The sign of 
P – p(t) 
the last contribution to the sum of the right side member of Eqn. 2 depends on 
the sign of the term [(C4  C,) 
,-D20ATi(t)+ A D20  } which is always > 0 in the useful 
A 
working temperature range (it becomes < 0 at AT,(t) =  
> 906.5 °C !!) 
(Cg  CI )D,o  
whereas the overall magnitude can be evaluated close to = 4.5 mW for I < 1A and 
= 5.4 x 10-7  m3s-1  at stp (see below). 
The radiative term —Rad {[T,, + AT, (0]4  — T:1, for the same above considerations on 
irdh 
ATi, is evaluated ranging around 3 mW and, therefore, for practical purposes 
Eqn. 2 can be written as 
aAT, irclk,„,ex  
Pin  a ins  Cs  (T.  +  
hATi(t) 
It is important to point out that in the case of determination of P exc, Eqn. 2 might 
be put in the form: 
pexc.,(t).  rnsc  an,T, + n-dkpyrex   
hAT(t)+43[AT(t)]— Pin.,(t)  
where, in the term cI[AT,(t)] are now considered the sum of both the terms 
previously neglected. It is esay to verify that the elimination of 0[AT,(t)] >0 from 
Eqn. 4 always produces an underestimate of P exc• 
The integration of Eqn. 3, in the case of a calibration step of input power, gives: 
where the term(  1 
 PYrer  is the slope of the calibration curve which 
corresponds to the (bi)-1  parameters shown in Table II. The theoretical time 
constant value is r — = p 
 1 V° C 
1  = 280 s. Higher values (350-400 s) of r are 
bi 
biM  
bi  
experimentally found due to the fact that the term should be more correctly 
written as C = m,C, + I mkCk  where the summation runs on all the masses 
present in the cell. If a set of points is obtained in stationary condition of ATi 
associated each time to a different Pin  value, provided h is kept constant by a level 
sensor, this set has to be, within the experimental errors, on a straight-line of 
slope ( irdhkP') since this vahue depends only on constant quantities. This is 
just what we in fact obtained, as shown in Table II. To check the validity of the 
treatment above, one can obtain k py,_ from the slope of the calibration curve . 

The averaged value obtained is 0.9 ± 0.1 Wm -1K-1  which is in agreement with 
the value reported in literature (30) (see Appendix B). 


Deuterium cutting system 

It is composed by two parts connected in series by SS (inner diam. 1.5 mm) or 
Nylon66 (inner diam. 3 mm) tubing: i . catalytic recombinator and ii . Pd sponge 
trap. This operation allows to measure tritium in the electrolysis gas phase (see 
below) and eliminate D2 from the gas stream before sampling for 4He analysis.
 
i . Catalytic recombinators:
They are described elsewhere (25). Their yield rl is calculated by the following 
equation: 

measuring the recombined volume of D20 in the time interval At. The 
correction for the condensation of D20 contained in the gas stream was 
measured to be 3.75x10 -6  cm3s-1 . The recombination yield value averaged on 10 
recombinators is about 92%. 

The partial pressure values of D2 at the recombinator inlet and outlet are given 
by the equations: 

Supposing, for instance, I = 1A, T1=  0.9 and using data in Appendix B. PD=  and 47 
are, respectively, equal to 1.74x10-1  P and 2.28x10-2  P. This last value is the D2 
partial pressure of the gas stream entering in the Pd sponge trap. 

ii . Pd sponge trap: 
Two equal traps, working alternatively and continuously fluxed under N2 
carrier, when in regeneration, are made of a SS cylinder with an inner coaxial SS 
tube. The path of the gas mixture inside the trap is a such to have the largest 
contact surface area with the Pd sponge. In each trap are contained 150 g about of 
Pd sponge from Johnson & Mattey (UK). 

If we suppose the absorption reaction 
Pd(s)+ 2 D2 (g) = PdDy (s)  
completely shifted on the right side, we can define the nominal capacity of the 
trap as C'aP 
 2 M pd  , therefore, the residual capacity of the ap with respect to the 
initial capacity, as a function of D20 consumed, is given by: 

It is easy to see that to exhaust a Pd trap, in the case of ri = 0, would be sufficient 
the electrolysis of just 8.5 cm3  of D20. Because in our case rl = 0.90, to exhaust 
completely the trap it would be necessary to make electrolysis of a D20 quantity 
ten times higher. 

The minimum partial pressure of D2 in the gas stream at outlet of the Pd trap 
should be equal to the activity of D2(g) in the gas phase in thermodynamic 
equilibrium with the condensed phase at a certain activity of D according to 
reaction 8. This value can be calculated by the following equation (31): 

As it is reported elsewhere (32), the background pressure of D2 at the outlet of the 
Pd trap, measured by mass spectrometry, has been found to be = 5x10-10  atm 
which, by Eqn. 10 corresponds, to y = 0.2. Therefore, the overall cutting factor of 
D2, present in the N2 carrier at the outlet of the electrolysis cell, is 108  about. This 
remarkable result joined to the high resolution power of the mass spectrometer 
allows to be very confident on the quantitative determinations both of 4He and 
D2


Measurements of Nuclear Byproducts 

i . Tritium.: 
To prevent any air contamination, contrarily to the past, we did not make 
tritium tests in the electrolytic solutions of the cells but only in D20 produced by 
the catalytic recombinators. The experimental procedure adopted to measure 
tritium was described elsewhere (24) as well as the calculation to evaluate the 
tritium electrolytic enrichment in the solution. In this experiment, because the 
tritium measurement is done on the recombined gases and a gas carrier is 
present in addition to the electrolysis gases, to evaluate correctly the effects of the 
electrolysis on the tritium concentration in the gas stream it is necessary to 
modify the mathematical treatment we utilized in the past. 

Considerations based on the mass balance of tritium in our cells lead to the 
following differential equation: 

As we stated before, in the previous section, the volume of electrolyte has to be 
constant, therefore, the term  
dt =0, and so the D20 feed, must be such as to 
compensate D20 consumed by the electrolysis and D20 evaporated in the gas 
stream escaping from the cell. If, as it normally occurs, the molar fraction of DTO 
in the D20 feed is the same as in the D20 initially present in the electrolytic 
solution, the integration of eqn. 11 gives: 
where the quantity q =
° represents the expected change, due only to the 
electrolysis, of tritium atomic fraction in the gas phase with respect to the initial 
atomic fraction of tritium in the electrolyte. In eqn. 12 the terms q h,„ and V* are, 
respectively, obtained by the equations below: 
In Fig. 3 is reported the qii m  surface in the plane V*, aE. Combining eqns. 13 and 
14, it is easy to show that only the values of V* satisfying the condition 
— — — can be selected in the above plot. In fact the left side 
term in the inequality has to be positive being the right side term always a 
positive quantity. As it appears in fig. 3, the values of the qiim  ?_1 correspond to 
V* and aE  values which are without physical meaning. 

At fixed temperature and carrier gas flow-rate, an important difference between 
eqn. 12 and eqn. 2 of ref. 24 (obtained for the tritium enrichment in the 
electrolyte) is that, Tim  and V* are also function of the electrolysis current 
whereas the corresponding terms a and 0 are constant quantities. By inspection 
of eqns. 12 through 14, the following remarks can be drawn: 

Figure 3 Calculated surface of qiim  term in eqn. 12 as function of V* and electrolytic separation factor 
between deuterium and tritium on a Pd cathode. 

Therefore, the expected q vs vcons  curve starts from —
and remains, of course, 
at this value if I=0 or tends to 1 in the case of electrolysis without any carrier gas 
stream, whatever is the I value. Since aE depends mostly from the nature of the 
cathode, on Pd aE =1.8 (24-25), it is expected that the q limits will be in the range 
from = 2 to 1. In this experiment, fN 2  # 0 and kept always constant whereas I was 
changed and in some cases put off for a certain period of time, as it will be shown 
in the results section. Therefore, we have to expect that throughout the 
experiment, if tritium is not generated in the cell by a nuclear reaction, the value 
of q must be within the range 1 
— q < 1. Further aspects will be treated in the 
discussion section. 

ii . Helium -4: 
See in this book the paper by the same authors concerning the quantitative mass 
spectrometric measurements of 4He. 

iii . Neutrons: 
A description of our more recent system for neutron detection was already 
reported (26). However, for the sake of a better understanding of the results, a 
cross-section of the detector-cell system assembly is shown in Fig. 4. 

Figure 4.  Cross section of the neutron detector assembly. Dashed area is the torus containing the 
electrochemical cells. Black circles represent the 3He tubes. Each counting group is constituted by 
five tubes. 

iiii . Data Aquisition System:
Two separate data acquisition systems are now at work [only one in the past (24)1 
in our experiments both based on the network Macintosh. Computer a IEEE- 
488&RS-232 Interfaces a Instruments. They are dedicated the first to the neutron 
acquisition (see before and ref. 26) and the second to the acquisition and control 
(24) of all the other devices and sensors of the experimental set-up (mostly 
through a data logger). The programs running on each of the two systems were 
home-made both realized on the software Lab VIEW 2.1.1 from National 
Instruments (Austin,TX). All the temperature, voltage, current and other analog 
signals go to the analog input channels of the data logger (Orion 3531 D, 
Schlumberger,UK) and logged at fixed scan intervals. Generally the scan interval 
time is set at 300 s but it can change automatically to 5 s if an alarm occurs on one 
of the logged channels. The alarm feature is based on a preset threshold. All the 
channels connected to the cathode and solution thermocouples of each cell as 
well as the counter channel connected in parallel to the TTL logic OR of the 
neutron counter are set to generate alarms. The primary file (the program 
generates also other ancillary files as for example those containing dating and 
volumes of D20 refillings of each cell) of every piece of data acquisition is 
constituted of a matrix of 1000 rows x 60 columns which is build by append mode 
on both the RAM and removable hardisks. A real time plotting of all the 
channels is at the hand on the computer screen. 

Finally, as already mentioned, since the system of all the cells is positioned inside 
the neutron detector, a B/W TV camera, connected to a videorecorder, is placed 
in the center of the torus, and operated both in manual and automatic remote 
control (by data logger), to have a more direct control of the status of each cell. 


Results 

Calorimetric and 4He data: 
All the data that will be presented throughout the text are to be intended as 
obtained according to the step-wise patterns of the electrolysis current as showed 
in fig. 5 for all the cells tested. 

In the four next figures which follow (figs. 6 to 9), two graphs each are reported 
which represent the 4He and calorimetric results throughout the experiment for 
some cells. Each figure shows in the upper part the 4He concentration, given in 
ppb, compared with the 4He concentration in the blank cell and, in the bottom 
part, the input power (left scale) and heat power excess (right scale). Heat power 
excess has been calculated according to eqn. 1 and Table II and the related error 
has to be considered conservatively equal to ±10% of the value while the error 
on the input power is, as already mentioned, negligible. Because of the high 
number of points composing each curve (>104), in order to obtain a better 
readability, the errors bars are not reported in the bottom graphs. To facilitate a 
comparison of the energy quantities involved both the scales have the same 
limits. Furthermore, the lack of heat excess results in some parts of the related 
curve is due to a conservative choice we adopted in not considering those data 
which were acquired in experimental conditions not exactly equal to the ones in 
which the calibration curve had been obtained6. The error on 4He concentration 
6Connected to some electrical pertubations induced during the D2 confinement experiment on cell #4 

Cell#2 : 
has been estimated equal to ± 13% of the value (28) Cells #1 and #7 did not show 
any excess of heat power within the experimental error. For cell #1, this is as 
expected because it is the blank cell. Cell #7 was switched on in the final part of 
the experiment essentially having the scope (any particular attention was 
reserved to the charging protocol) to obtain other elements to understand the 
effect of a change of gas composition, due to electrolysis, on the mechanism of a 
supposed contamination by air. In fact, in this case, the line was continuously 

Figure 5 Time chart of the electrolysis current applied to the cells reported in Table I 

fluxed by the carrier gas since more than 700 h. 4He data of cell #7 are shown 
elsewhere in this book (28). The maximum value of heat power excess in each 
cell was found in the range from 2 to 19 W (± 10%) and the ratio r = excess power  
input power 
ranging from 0.13 to 0.70. These figures and other ones extracted from the plots 
above are reported in Table III. 

Figure 6 : Cell #2 Upper figure. 4He concentration in the gas stream of cell #2 and reference cell #1 
Bottom figure. Left ordinate: input power; Right ordinate: heat power excess 

Table III. Summary of the calorimetric results 

Figure 8: Cell #8
Upper figure. 4He concentration in the gas stream of cell #8 and reference cell #1 
Bottom figure. Left ordinate: input power; Right ordinate: heat power excess 

Figure 7: Cell #4 
Upper figure. 4He concentration in the gas stream of cell #4 and reference cell #1 
Bottom figure. Left ordinate: input power; Right ordinate: heat power excess 

Figure 9: Cell #10 
Upper figure. 4He concentration in the gas stream of cell #10 and reference cell #1 
Bottom figure. Left ordinate: input power; Right ordinate: heat power excess 


Tritium data 

Tritium data are reported in figs.10 and 11. In both fig. 11 five equal graphs are 
reported in which each of them gives   as calculated by eqn.12, q #exp  measured   
in the recombined gases (we remind that q eitxp  = --L) and only the values of the 
difference (q e#xp  - q th ) satisfying the condition (exp  - q #,h )
x°  = 5  = 6.25x10-2, 
where .6,x8  is the experimental error on the measurement, given in dpm m1-1, of 
the atomic fraction of tritium in the recombined D20. In considering the plot of 
cell#1, it has to be taken into account that the theoretical equation has been 
calculated by assuming a E (Pt)= cc E (Pd). Since, notwhitstanding the criterion 
adopted before in discriminating (q:xp  - q,h ) values, some (q 1exp  - Aih ) values were 
still found > 0, to be conservative, the quantity of tritium atoms in excess in the 
electrolytic solution of each cell was obtained by subtracting the averaged data 
(ciexp - qih) > 6.25x10-2. To calculate the integral curve of the excess of tritium 
atoms, the following equation was then used: 
f 3H dt = 9.17x106aEx° V°{S [(q:xp  - qr,, ) - (gel  xp  - q„)idt}   (16) 

Figure 10 Tritium in recombined gases. Values of cith, qexp and (qth-qexp) for cells 
#1,#2, #4, #8 and #10. 

by considering first that the combination of a E  and q allows to write x#  = aEx°q# 
 (see also 

the list of symbols and constant). As it clearly appears in fig. 11, through 
the procedure adopted, excess of tritium is present only in cells #2 and #8. 

Figure 11 Excess of tritium atoms for cells #2 and #8 


Neutrons data 

In this experiment, there was no statistical evidence of neutron emission from 
the cells. Fig. 12 shows the number of neutrons detected each ten minutes by the 
groups of tubes no. 1, 3, 6, 11, 12 before and during the experiment. 

Figure 12 Counts in 10 min of 5 counting groups out of 12 before and after the starting of the experiment. For 
checking the positioning of the counting groups, see figure 4 

The neutron countings vs time graphs of the other groups are not shown for 
readability purposes, but they show similar characteristics and trend. As shown 
in the figure, there is no statistical difference between the number of neutrons 
detected when the electrolysis was in progress and the background. Apparent 
exceptions are the two large countings of the group 12, which occurred beween 
900 and – 1200 hours. Howewer, simple considerations about the settlement of 
the experimental apparatus together with the check, by the oscilloscope, of the 
pulses coming from the groups of tubes, showed that the two great 
enhancements of the neutron counting rate of the group 12 (as well other 
enhancements detected by other groups not showed in fig. 12 and having the 
same characteristics), were not generated by neutrons. In fact: 
- As shown in fig. 4, the presence of two rings of groups of tubes surrounding the 
toroid embedding the cells, assures that a bunch of neutrons coming from 
whichever cell (and also from the region outside the detector) must hit at least 
one group in each ring. Enhancements of the neutron counting of group 12, if 
generated by real neutrons, must hence be simultaneous to other 
enhancements of at least one of the outer ring groups. Particularly, the group 
11 is bounded to detect an enhancement too; 
The normal shape of the analogical signal coming from a group hit by a 
neutron, as checked by the oscilloscope, is a peculiar negative shape (see fig. 6 of 
ref. 24). The two enhancements of the neutron counting detected by the group 
12 were instead generated by anomalous pulses, in which a sudden, very large, 
negative drop of the signal was followed by oscillations around zero. 


Discussion 

Due to the absence of significant amount of neutrons and low excess of 3H atoms 
with respect to the excess power measured we will try in the followings to 
consider the nuclear reaction 
d + d = 4He + 23.8 MeV(lattice)  
as originating the observed power excess. Therefore the most important 
comparison to be made is that between the power excess and the 4He found 
assuming the above reaction as the source of both these quantities. 

In order to compare the excess power data reported in figures 6 to 9 with 4He 
found, it is necessary to evaluate the minimum sampling time, mst, defined as 
the time required to fill our sampling cylinder of volume V s  at the gas flow-rate 
JG at the sampling stage (after the catalytic recombination). The mst quantity is 
The quantity so calculated corresponds to the time which would be spent by an 
ideal piston moving at constant velocity from the bottom to the top of the 
sampling cylinder. This is like to say that the entering gas moves pushing out the 
pure N2 initially present in the cylinder. Under this hypothesis, the composition 
of the gas trapped in the cylinder at sampling is representative of the gas 
composition during the last mst seconds before the sampling independently of 
the fluxation time. In fig. 13 (right scale), the equation 18 is reported vs the 
electrolysis current at different values of i. It appears that in the range of our 
experimental conditions the mst value is confined within a short range of 
variability and, in any case, is at least 12 times lower than the sampling time we 
effectively adopted because of the reasons shown elsewhere (28). As expected 
from eqn. 18, for n -+ 1, mst is independent of the electrolysis current value. 

Therefore, if the heat power excess is measured in the gas phase, by considering 
the mass flux balance in the cell it is possible to calculate the expected 4He 
concentration,x,He, produced through reaction 17, in the sampled gas stream by 
the equation below: 

The approximate term implies P exc  constant on time in the integration interval 
and the contribution of 4He flux negligible with respect the sum of the other 
fluxes. From eqn. 19, one sees that the 4He concentration measurable in the gas 
stream depends on some experimental parameter which is mandatory to keep 
under control. In fig. 13 (left scale), the quantity  
, derived from eqn. 19, is 
dPexc  
plotted against the electrolysis current. For 'n -4 1, also the specific 4He 
concentration becomes independent from I. 

Figure 13 
Left scale: Specific 4He expected to be measured in the electrolysis gases per 1 W of excess power as 
function of electrolysis current at different values of i. 
Right scale (scatter plots): Minimum sampling time, tnst, as function of the electrolysis current 

To convert the experimental concentration values (in ppb) of 4He into excess 
power, the following equation was used: 
 is the total number of molecules in the sampling cylinder. Pe„, 
calculated by eqn. 20 has to be intended averaged on mst.. In fig. 14, we give in 
separate plots for cell #4 and #10, respectively, top and bottom part of the figure, 

Figure 14 
Upper figure: cell #4; Bottom figure: cell #10 
Left ordinate: Heat power excess as measured by calorimetry. Continuous line 
Right ordinate: Heat power excess calculated by 4He data (reaction 17 and eqn.20). Circle points 

the heat power excess, as obtained by calorimetry, left scale, (see figs. 7 and 9 
bottom plots right scales), and on the right scale the heat power excess calculated 
by eqn. 20 through 4He data (see figs. 7 and 9 upper plots). It is important to 
observe that in each plot of fig. 14 the two heat power excess quantities, obtained 
in a completely independent way,  are comparable (note that the limits of the 
ordinate scales are the same in each plot). It is evident by examining fig. 14 that 
two different processes are at work and in both cases the 4He concentrations are 
clearly higher than the respective 4He backgrounds before the start of the 
experiment (not for cell #10 because we have not background) other than the 
background found in the blank cell #1. If we limit to the time interval where 
electrolysis is still on (see fig. 5), we observe for cell #4 a progressive increase of 
the heat power excess from 4He, HPEH, to compare with a quite constant and low 
heat power excess from calorimetry, HPEC. This trend is clear even if the error 
bars are considered for both the quantities, though, quite at any time, (HPEH ± 
AHPEH) = (HPEC ± AHPEC) holds. In cell #10, the result (HPEH ± AHPEH) > 
(HPEC ± AHPEC) is always found only when the electrolysis current was 
drastically decreased or off. In all other cases, HPEC prevails. What is impressing 
is that 4He recovering is systematically found after generation of excess heat. 

Concerning the evaluation of AHPEC, this was already treated in the 
experimental section while the evaluation of AHPEH originates immediately 
from eqn. 20 being this quantity proportional to the error in the 4He 
determination (28). The application of eqn. 20 to the 4He data of cells #2 and #8 
(figs. 6 and 8, respectively) leads to HPEH values lower than 0.6 ± 0.1 W after 
subtracting the 4He background before the starting of the electrolysis. This value 
is in any case better (but comparable to) than the calorimetric detection limit as 
shown in Table II. According to fig. 13 and the maximum HPEC found, the 
corresponding maximum values of the 4He concentration expected for cells #2 
and #8 should be, respectively, 195 and 292 ppb. This is far enough from the 
experimental findings. A similar reasoning better matches for cell #10 and 
partially also for cell #4. Therefore, apparently, we are left with the dilemma of 
one cell which shows a 4He concentration in the gas phase of the correct order of 
magnitude (with respect to the heat excess) while others, cell #2 and cell #8, do 
not. On the other hand it must be pointed out that before drawing any particular 
conclusion two central questions are to be answered: does it exist a time relation 
between the heat generation and 4He release out from the surface ? and, if yes, is 
the delay a function of how the source is deep inside with respect to the electrode 
surface ? 

To our knowledge, there are not yet experimental evidences to answer 
satisfactorily to these questions. On the other hand some pieces of general 
information on this argument comes only from the experiments carried out for 
studying the effect of the 3He, as product of tritium decay, on mechanical and 
physical properties of materials candidate for hot fusion reactors (33). However, 
our hypothesis on the behaviour of helium in Pd when it is generated in situ is 
based on the fact that being highly insoluble, it nucleates everywhere a point or 
linear defect exists. The transformation from a cluster of a few atoms to 
microbubbles depends on the extension of the defects and/or to the possibility of 
migration of defects. The probability for a bubble to reach the surface is in any 
case very low and increases on decreasing the distance between the nucleation 
centre and the surface. If this distance becomes greater than 10 nm (see M.W. Lee 
in ref. 16), the calculated time required for 4He to reach the surface could be as 
long as 14 years (34). Up to this point we believe this scheme applicable to all the 
metals and alloys, but things could seriously change in the case of a Pd specimen 
subject to a process where defects are continuously generated and propagate quite 
randomly in the metallic matrix due to D charging. In this case, the pattern for 
4He to reach the surface could be through the defects (sometimes so extended 
that they collapse generating fractures) produced by D loading. If so, we can expect 
any time correlation between the time of heat generation and 4He release, except 
be made when the site of the nuclear reaction is the surface itself or some 
monolayers below. It appears that the recovery of 4He in the gas phase of 
different electrodes (, and therefore different microstructures,) is far from being 
expected to occur at any definite and predictable rate. Therefore, under this 
hypothesis, all the results of heat excess and 4He we showed keep their own 
consistency. 

For the above considerations, we have to expect that the condition HPEH 5_ HPEC 
should be commonly found. An experimental evidence consistent with the 
reasoning above comes from the literature (3) in which the energy associated to 
4He was found more or less an order of magnitude lower than the energy found 
by calorimetry. 

The integration of HPEH and HPEC data of cell #10 given in fig. 14 is reported in 
fig. 15 where throughout the experiment the heat excess from 4He is found 
comparable with the heat excess measured by calorimetry  though, the former is, 
in extended interval of time (from 200 to 500 h and from 600 to 1050 h), greater 
than the latter. 

Figure 15: Cell #10 
Left ordinate: Heat excess obtained by integration on time of heat power excess as measured by 
calorimetry (fig. 9 bottom figure right ordinate) 
Right ordinate: Heat excess obtained by integration on time of eqn.20 
According to the reasoning above this is not allowed and we have to introduce 
in the discussion the possibility of another source of 4He, likely, air 
contamination in some extent as it appears from the 20Ne detection? (28). 

Concerning the error bar on solid curve of fig. 15, the same considerations given 
before for the other curves containing calorimetric data still hold. 
Concerning tritium data it should be noted that in the plots of fig.10 and 11 there 
are a few number of experimental points, q, not only exceding the expected 
value, 4, over the experimental error, but z 1. It is easy to demonstrate from 
eqn 13 that the condition q lim  1, in absence of tritium generation, would 
produce the result -
.C7C  5_1 which is clearly impossible due to the fact that aE  must 

This constitutes a strong rigorous support in favor of 
generation of tritium, even if, this seems to occurs at low level and sporadically. 

On the other hand, it is important to remind that the tritium measurement is 
not an on-line measurement and since it is done on the recombined D20, the 
minimum time interval between two samplings is the time necessary to produce 
at least 1 ml of D20 which is the suitable volume to perform the tritium 
determination. This time is given by —. By considering the current plots (see 
fig . 5), the time required varies from .1 (at 1=2.5 A) to =33 (at I=0.1A) hours. For 
practical reasons is not possible for us to perform the tritium test every 1 ml of 
D20 produced, expecially at the highest current values, so very often the 
sampling (of 1 ml) is made on a higher volume of D20. In the case of spike-wise 
release of tritium in the cell, as it is likely expected, this implies to loose this time 
structure because of the dilution effect which flats the concentration profile. 

Further key point to take into consideration, often not sufficiently stressed in 
discussing tritium measurements, is the distribution of tritium generated, if any. 

It is our opinion, also supported in literature (35,36), that tritium should be 
mostlty searched in the cathode and/or in the gas phase. In fact, if tritium is 
produced in the bulk of the cathode, it can be trapped and/or released on time as 
DT (g). If generated at the surface, the DT molecules go directly in the gas phase. 

According to the general adopted mechanism (37) of H (D) electrolytic reduction 
on a cathode, Me, the H2 (D2) formation step can follow two different processes: 
Dads(Me) + Dads(Me) = D2 (g)  
(21A) 
and/or 
Dads(Me) + D20 + e(Me) = D2 (g) + OD'  
(21B) 
If tritium atoms, T , are produced, at the Me surface, reactions 21 become: 
Dads(Me) 
Tads(Me) = DT (g)  
(22A) 
and/or 
Tads(Me) + D20 + e(Me) = D2 (g) + OT  
(22B) 
7Without invoking the concurrent release of both 4He and 20Ne 
Through step 22B, it is possible to keep tritium in the solution as really found 
and reported previously (20,24,25). There is not other process allowing to tritium 
to remain in the solution in significative extent being the solubility of DT in D20 
and the catalyzed reaction of T at the cathode with dissolved oxygen in solution 
to give DTO, very negligible processes. Therefore, a complete balance of tritium 
would require its measurement in both the Pd cathode and the solution. 

Furthermore, as we did, the tritium is measured in the gas phase via the external 
catalytic recombination two factors does exist which concurr to give a result in 
defect: i ) the isotopic effect on the catalytic recombination which increases the 
rate of the D20 formation with respect to DTO; ii) the stoichiometric ratio D -1  , 
fixed by the electrolysis and good for the recombination, is no more strictly 
satisfied in the recombinator when tritium is generated. 

From fig. 11, it appears that a net production of tritium atoms, significatively out 
of the experimental errors (we remind the procedure showed in the results 
section) only occurs in the cells #2 and #8. Incidentally, in these cells 4He was 
found to be very low and not comparable with the excess heat. 

If the channel of tritium of the plasma fusion d,d reaction is invoked, we can 
calculate that the energy released throughout the experiment in the case of cell 
#2, for instance, is 115 J, whereas, a rough evaluation of the integrated heat excess 
measured by calorimetry in the same cell (see fig. 6) is more than four order of 
magnitude higher. By the same reasoning, we should expect an excess of 
neutrons with respect to the background equal to the number of tritium atoms. 

This would imply a maximum averaged rate of = 7x10 7  ns-1. This rate value 
other than to be very dangerous, it would be easily detectable whereas, as shown 
in fig. 12 no excess of neutrons above the background was measured. 


Conclusions 

Our calorimetric results show excess power quite in linea with the other positive 
results reported up to now. In particular, if one considers the power excess per 
unit electrode surface area as a function of the current density, a fair agreement is 
found with the general behaviour first pointed out by Storms (38) by considering 
many calorimetric measurements on the Pd- D20 electrolysis carried out at room 
temperature in different laboratories with different calorimetric devices and 
procedures were used. As concerns the nuclear products, in the present 
experiment, a lack of neutrons and a low tritium excess on two cells out of four 
has been observed contrarily to what expected on the basis of d,d reactions . Also, 
under this respect our results do confirm the previous findings which exhibited 
such a large unbalance. As for the 4He measurements in the escaping gases, the 
detection of 20Ne (28), prevents to draw definite conclusions from the 
comparison with the calorimetric data. However it cannot be left unnoticed the 
notable commensurate amounts of 4He and heat excess found in the case of cell 
#10. Quite striking is also the time pattern of the amount of 4He recovered 
which, shifted in time, does match the power excess time pattern observed. The 
different quantities of 4He recovered from different cells (e.g. #8 and #10 ) where 
power excesses of same order of magnitude have been observed, if 
understandable by invoking different kinetics of the 4He release, highlight the 
usefulness of being able to perform a complete energy and mass balance by taking 
into account also the 4He content of the electrodes.  


References 

1. M. Fleischmann and S. Pons, Physics Letters A, 176 (1993) 118 
2. D. Albagli et al., J. Fusion Energy, 9 (1990) 133 
3. B.F. Bush, J.J. Lagowski, M.H. Miles and G.S. Ostrom, J. Electroanal. Chem., 304 
(1991) 271 
4. N. Lewis et al., Nature, 340 (1989) 525 
5. M.H. Miles, R.A. Hollins, B.F. Bush, J.J. Lagowski and R.E. Miles, J. 
Electroanal. Chem., 346 (1993) 99 
6. E. Yamaguchi and T. Nishioka, ICCF3, 3rd International Conference on Cold 
Fusion, Nagoya, October 21-25, 1992, Proc. in Frontiers of Cold Fusion, Edited 
by H. Ikegami, Frontiers Science Series no.4, Universal Academy Press Inc., 
Tokyo (1993), p.179 
7 . J. O'M. Bockris, C.C. Chien, D. Hodko and Z. Minevski, Proc. in Frontiers of 
Cold Fusion, Edited by H. Ikegami, Frontiers Science Series no.4, Universal 
Academy Press Inc., Tokyo (1993), p.231 
8. B.Y. Liaw and P.L. Tau, J. Electroanal. Chem., 319 (1991) 161 
9.P.L. Hagelstein, J. Fusion Energy, 9 (1991) 451; see also ICCF4 ref. 16 
10.G. Preparata, in: Common Problems and Ideas of Modern Physics, Eds. T. 
Bressani, B. Minetti and A. Zenoni, (World Scientific, 1992); G. Preparata, in: 
The Science of Cold Fusion: Proc. Second Annual Conf. on Cold Fusion, 
ACCF2, Como, Italy, 29 June - 4 July 1991, Eds. T. Bressani, E. Del Giudice and 
G. Preparata, vol.33 of the Conf. Proc. of the Italian Physical Society , (Bologna, 
1991), p. 453 
11.J. Schwinger, Z. Phys.D, 15 (1990) 21; Z. Naturforsch. A, 45 (1990) 756; see also 
ICCF4 ref. 16 
12.H. Rambaut and J.P. Vigier, Physics Letters A, 142 (1989) 447; 148 (1990) 229; 163 
(1992) 335 
13.Proc. First Annual Conf. on Cold Fusion, ACCF1, Salt Lake City, Ut, 28-31, 
March 1990 
14.Proc. Second Annual Conf. on Cold Fusion, ACCF2, Como, Italy, 29 June - 4 
July, 1991, Eds. T. Bressani, E. Del Giudice and G. Preparata, The Science of 
Cold Fusion, vol.33 of the Conf. Proc. of the Italian Physical Society , (Bologna, 
15.Proc. Third Int. Conf. on Cold Fusion, ICCF3, Nagoya, 21-25 October, 1992 , 
Frontiers of Cold Fusion, Ed. H. Ikegami, Frontiers Science Series no.4, 
(Universal Academy Press Inc., Tokyo 1993) 
16.Proc. Fourth Int. Conf. on Cold Fusion, ICCF4, Lahaina, Hawaii, Dec. 6-9, 1993, 
(EPRI Proc.), to be published 
17.Workshop on Cold Fusion Phenomena, Santa Fe, NM, May 22-25, 1989, Proc. 
on J.Fusion Energy, 9 (1990) 
18.Anomalous Nuclear Effects in Deuterium/Solid Systems, Provo, UT, October 
22-24, 1990 AIP Conference Proceedings 228, (Eds. S. Jones, F. Scaramuzzi and 
D.Worledge), American Institute of Physics (New York) 1991 
19.D. Gozzi, P.L. Cignini, L. Petrucci, M. Tomellini, G. De Maria, S. Frullani, F. 
Garibaldi, F. Ghio and M. Jodice in: Understanding Cold Fusion Phenomena, 
Eds. R.A. Ricci, E. Sindoni and F. De Marco, vol. 24 of The Conf. Proc. of the 
Italian Physical Society , (Bologna, 1989), p. 
20.D. Gozzi, P.L. Cignini, L. Petrucci, M. Tomellini, G. De Maria, S. Frullani, F. 
Garibaldi, F. Ghio and M. Jodice, Nuovo Cimento, 103A (1990) 143-154 
21.M. Tomellini and D. Gozzi, J. MatScience Lett., 9 (1990) 836-838 
22.D. Gozzi, P.L. Cignini, L. Petrucci, M. Tomellini, G. De Maria, S. Frullani, F. 
Garibaldi, F. Ghio, M. Jodice and E. Tabet, J. Fusion Energy, 9 (1990) 241-247 
23.D. Gozzi, P.L. Cignini, L. Petrucci, M. Tomellini, S. Frullani, F. Garibaldi, F. 
Ghio, M. Jodice and G.M. Urciuoli in: Anomalous Nuclear Effects in 
Deuterium/Solid Systems, Eds. S. Jones, F. Scaramuzzi and D.Worledge, AIP 
Conf. Proc. vol. 228, (American Institute of Physics, New York, 1991), p. 481 
24.D. Gozzi, P.L. Cignini, M. Tomellini, S. Frullani, F. Garibaldi, F. Ghio, M. 
Jodice and G. M. Urciuoli, Fusion Technol., 21 (1992) 60 
25.D. Gozzi, P.L. Cignini, M. Tomellini, S. Frullani, F. Garibaldi, F. Ghio, M. 
Jodice and G. M. Urciuoli in: The Science of Cold Fusion: Proc. Second 
Annual Conf. on Cold Fusion, ACCF2, Como, Italy, 29 June - 4 July 1991, Eds. 
T. Bressani, E. Del Giudice and G. Preparata, vol.33 of the Conf. Proc. of the 
Italian Physical Society , (Bologna, 1991), p. 21 
26.D. Gozzi, P.L. Cignini, R. Caputo, M. Tomellini, G. Balducci, G. Gigli, E. 
Cisbani, S. Frullani, F. Garibaldi, M. Jodice and G. M. Urciuoli in: Frontiers of 
Cold Fusion, Ed. H. Ikegami, Frontiers Science Series no.4, (Universal 
Academy Press Inc., Tokyo 1993), 155 
27.D. Gozzi et al., submitted to J. Electroanal.Chem. 
28.D. Gozzi et al., Helium-4 Quantitative Measurements in the Gas Phase of Cold 
Fusion Electrochemical Cells, companion paper in this book 
29.J. Balej and J. Divisek, J. Electroanal. Chem., 278 (1989) 85 
30.Handbook of Physics and Chemistry , 60th Edition, R.C. Weast Ed., CRC Press 
Inc. (1980) 
31.Hydrogen in Metals, Edited by G. Alefeld and J. Valid, Springer-Verlag, 
Heidelberg, vol. II p.95 (1978) 
32. D. Gozzi et al., Electrochemical Confinement of Deuterium in Palladium, 
paper in preparation 
33.E. Ruedl et al.; F. Carsughi et al.; P. Gondi, Proc. of Research, Development 
and Technology of Fusion Reactor Materials, ENEA, Frascati, Dec. 4-6, 1990 
34.G.J. Thomas and J.M. Mintz, J. Nucl.Mat., 116 (1983) 336 
35.F. G. Will, K. Cedzynska and D.C. Linton, ICCF4, 4th International Conference 
on Cold Fusion, Lahaina, Hawaii, December 6-9, 1993, EPRI Proceedings to be 
published 
36.K. Cedzynska, S.C. Barrowes, H.E. Bergeson, L.C. Knight and F.G. Will, 
Anomalous Nuclear Effects in Deuterium/Solid Systems, Provo, UT, October 
22-24, 1990 AIP Conference Proceedings 228, (Eds. S. Jones, F. Scaramuzzi and 
D.Worledge), American Institute of Physics (New York) 1991, p. 463; Fusion 
Technol., 20 (1991) 108; Fusion Technol., 22 (1992)156 
37. J. O'M. Bockris and A.K.N. Reddy, Modern Electrochemistry, vol. 2 ch.10, 
Plenum Press, New York (1974) 
38. E. Storms, Fusion Technol. 20 (1991) 433 
