1. Introduction

Since 23 March 1989, when Stanley Pons and Martin Fleischmann 
startled the scientific world with the announcement of sustained nuclear 
fusion in an electrolysis cell using heavy water electrolyte and palladium 
electrodes, controversy worthy of Heisenberg's philosophy has raged. 

Proponents of this new discovery have determinedly advanced experimental 
research and in many instances have achieved significant and remarkably 
encouraging results. Opponents have consistently discounted these results 
as errors in experimental technique and interpretation. This is peripheral 
controversy. 

More significant are the substantive criticisms that there 
is; 
1) no theoretical basis for the reaction, 2) no experimental 
repeatability, 
3) no neutron product from branching reactions, and 
4) 
no neutron or other radiation from secondary reactions. 

These negative arguments are helpful in that they identify reasonable 
scientific concerns and thus define basic questions that must be answered 
positively. This paper addresses these questions. In response to: 
1) it 
proposes that the Coulomb force of absorbed deuterons crowds those near 
the center of the palladium cathode to nuclear fusion; 
2) it suggests 
from the mechanics of 1) a sufficiently comprehensive understanding will 
evolve to explain already reported experimental results and to guide future 
experiments; 3) it argues that the kinetic energy of the nuclear reaction 
is so low and the Coulomb repulsion of the protons so high that one or 
the other deuteron decomposes into a neutron and a proton before the 
nuclei are close enough to fuse, the neutron suffering no repulsion and 
continuing on to fusion with the surviving deuteron while the energy of 
the reaction is carried away by the proton; 
and 4) it maintains that the 
low kinetic energy of nuclei in the neighborhood of fusion essentially 
represses secondary product nuclear reactions and that the only subsequent 
reaction is the decay of tritons to helium 3 nuclei. 

Simply put, cold fusion occurs when deuterons produced by 
electrolysis absorb into the palladium cathode where accumulation 
ultimately crowds those near the center of the cathode to [d-d] nuclear 
fusion. The primary product of the reaction is excess heat; a secondary 
product is B radiation from the decay of tritium. Other possible reactions 
are suppressed by the fusion environment. 

More explicit explanations 
follow. 

Of particular interest may be the theoretical construct for 
crowding fusion, the postulated mechanics of the nucleonic conduction 
property of metals (viviance), 
and the logical extension of the 
Mayer/Jensen Shell Model of the nucleus to develop an Alternate Model 
to the generally accepted Standard Model. 
651 


2. Theoretical Construct 

A space enclosed by a source of kinetic deuterons accumulates 
deuterons until in equilibrium with the source. Theoretically, a threshold 
can be reached where deuterons crowd to fusion near the center of the 
space. 

The construct envisions a hypothetical fusion cell in which a 
sustained envelope of deuteron plasma concentrates deuterons inward 
toward fusion. 

Fusion diameter, charge volume (C), viviance, and charge 
time are formulated for the threshold of fusion. 

The special case of a spherical source of diameter D0 simplifies 
description of the physical mechanics of the cell. 

A constant charge; 
Q0 = N0 deuterons, (= N0 x e+ in esu), (1)
is assumed to be uniformly distributed about a spherical surface of diameter 
D0 as shown in Figure l(a). 

Deuterons emanate from the source until
the plasma charge Qi within the sphere is in equilibrium with the source 
charge Q0• 
Since the charge at the center of the sphere must be zero, 
the internal charge along any diameter ranges, from q0 to zero to q0,
as shown in Figure l(b}. 
• • • 
0 • 
0 
(a) 
0 
• • • o 
o 
0 
I
0 
o 
0 
0 
I 
O 
0 
·•oq_ 
0 
- - -o -- - 0-- •+o-- --
·. ·1·
0 i:
°i •• :
0 
(b) 
0 
0 0 . 0 
0 
0 
I! I 
O 
0 
0 
0 
0 0 0 0 • 
0 
(de teron) 
Figure 1. Theoretical construct. 

The effective charge at 
any 
concentric 
spherical 
boundary (di < Do) within the 
plasma is; 
(2) 
and 
the 
number of 
charge 
elements ni in that charge is; 
(3) 
The charge elements of cross 
sectional 
area 
Ae 
are 
uniformly 
distributed. 
about 
the spherical area Ai; where, 
Ae = 1't(de)2/4, 
and 
Aj = 7C (dj)2. 
(4) 
(5) 
When 
the 
product 
of 
the 
number 
of deuterons ni and 
the cross sectional area 
of 
the 
deuteron 
Ae equals or 
exceeds the spherical surface 
area 
Aj 
fusion may occur; 
i.e. when, 
652 
From (3) and (5) the diameter df and the number nt of fusion 
elements in terms of the diameter of the deuteron de are, 
df = (de)2No/4Do, 
nt = 4df2/de2· 
(7) 
(8) 
From the logic of these arguments and equations the theoretical 
conclusion is drawn that; Fusion of deuterons will occur about the center 
of a spherical space bounded by a constant deuteron charge supply source 
Q0 when that source exceeds the internal charge element storage capacity 
Qj of the space. This is consistent with Coulomb's Law and simply stated 
is; Crowding Fusion is, f (constant charge source), f(fini te charge space) 
when, 
Qo<Do)2   q/dt)2' 
(9) 
where qf is the fusion charge and d
f is the diameter of fusion. 

Fusion will occur when, 
From (12) the critical diameter of fusion for nt deuterons is, 
(FUSION DIAMETER) 
df = (nfde2)1/2. 
(11) 
The distance separating deuterons Ai has a rate of change with 
respect to diameter di that is proportional to X. • 
Thus, the number of 
deuterons nd across the diameter D0 is, 
where the distance between deuterons at source Q0 is >.. 0; 
and the 
distance between deuterons at df <>-t> is de· 
Since df and de are (lo-5 x ). 0) or smaller,
(13) 
The approximate number of deuterons nt to charge the volume to fusion 
is then, 
(CAPACITY) 
(14) 
Q0 supplies a constant deuteron charging current called j for 
convenience. The transfer function relating it to the sustaining current 
i0 of the ionizer; 
i.e. the liveliness or viviance of diffusion of the 
deuteron in the charge medium, is designated by the symbol µ where, 
(VIVIAN CE) 
µ = j/io· 
653 
It is convenient to measure j in amperes since the ionization of one 
deuteron o+ in the source removes one electron e from the source. 

Then the charge time to fusion tf is, 
(CHARGE TIME) 
(16) 
This analysis can be extended to any charge medium of any shape 
that is within a closed charge source. Of particular interest at this time 
are palladium (Pd) cathodes of cold nuclear fusion electrolysis cells. 


3. Viviance

Accumulated absorptivity of energy and matter crowds deuterons to 
cold fusion. 

This requires, 
1) a sustained source of kinetic deuterons, 
2) a field for inward drift of absorbed deuterons, and 
3) the cathode
bulk property of nucleonic conductance or viviance. 

The adsorptive
kinetics of. charge Q0 enveloping the cathode surface of the cold fusion
cell; 
1) sustain a source of kinetic deuterons, a sm.all fraction of which
penetrate the cathode, and 2) develop back voltage E0 which establishes
a · positive absorptive field gradient. 

The reversible formation and
dissociation of palladium deuterides 3) provides the mechanics of. viviance.

Adsorption kinetics at the cathode surface create an ionosphere of 
randomly moving low. meV deuterons. 

Most capture electrons and escape 
the electrolyte as deuterium gas or scatter as they collide with the 
cathode surface. A few with direction of travel either parallel (- 1 ° of 
arc) to a crystal plane or coincident (- 0 .3 ° arc) with a crystal channel 
penetrate the cathode. 

Repulsion of the nuclei of the crystal tends to 
confine these to the open space of the plane or channel. 

They may 
travel several hundred lattice layers into the crystal before being absorbed. 

The size of the deuteron relative to other molecules, atoms, and ions 
present in cell electrolysis, also contributes to the depth of penetration. 

Scale in Angstroms (10-8 centimeters) 
1 
3 
5 
7 
9 
+ 
(+) 
I I I I I I I • I I I I 
*D+ diameter approx. 10-13cm.

Figure 2. Size of molecules, atoms, and ions in cell electrolysis. 

The systematic conditions existing at any moment in a single metal 
crystal with at least one surface exposed to a deuterium ionosphere 
include ions, atoms and molecules of deuterium and deuterides of the 
metal. The electrostatic charge of an individual single crystal is equal 
654 
to the totality of charge of the ions extant in the crystal at that moment. 

These conditions maintained; 
1) this charge increases until it reaches 
equilibrium with the surface charge of the crystal and 2) detiterides 
ultimately form at all vacancies and at the boundaries of the crystal 
where incompleteness of crystal structure abound. In summary the single 
metal crystal might be characterized as a temporary electrical storage cell. 

This systematic description of a single metal crystal is inadequate 
to describe the characteristics of the bulk metal. 

The composition of 
metal is grains of polycrystalline structure. This polycrystalline structure 
is schematically illustrated in Figure 3. 
metal 
grains 
polycrystalline 
grain 
Figure 3. 

Polycrystalline/grain/bulk metal structure. 

The typical grain 
structure 
of metals 
results 
from 
uneven 
solidification. 

Individual grains are seldom perfect single crystals. 

Generally numerous crystals of random orientation commence growth as 
solidification begins. 

A polycrystalline mass forms as these grow into 
one another. 

Disorder and structural incompleteness abound along 
crystalline boundaries within the polycrystalline mass. Deuterides of the 
metal may form along these boundaries, grain boundaries, and at other 
sites of structural incompleteness or irregularity. 

Further, there is 
adequate open space within the arrangement of atoms in palladium to 
accommodate deuterons and/or deuterium as interstitial impurities. 

Deuterium exhibits almost metallic properties in alloy like deuterides, 
is partly positive in character and can act as a connecting bridge be ween 
metal atoms. Interstitial deuterons may expand the crystal structure and 
can change the phase of the structure. In palladium the deuterides may 
take several distinct phases Pd2nDn where n is not necessarily an integer.
655 
Pd2nDn may be explained as a co-ordination compound; i.e., atoms
that are united by co-ordinate bonds or valences in accordance with 
Werner's Co-ordination Theory. 

The mechanism of these bonds relies on 
the metallic like properties, small size, and positive charge of the deuteron 
to attract electrons from neutral palladium atoms which have unshared 
electrons. The maximum number for the deuteron as the central ion in 
the co-ordinate compound is 2. Thus the deuteride Pd2D forms as,
Pd·D·Pd. 

The deuteride Pd4D2 forms about the deuterium molecule as, 
Pd.

Pd 
D·D 
Pd
0 
0Pd. 

Formation of Pd2D and Pd4D2 is enhanced by the square planar complexes 
formed by covalent complexes of bivalent palladium which configure the 
four corners of the square coplanar with the central ion. 

All palladium 
compounds are easily decomposed and these deuterides are particularly 
unstable. Dissociation of palladium deuterides is reversible. 

When thermal activation or kinetic disturbance causes a deuteride 
to dissociate deuteron(s) leave behind a negative lattice site and become 
conducting particle(s) free to drift in the electric. field of the lattice. 

The typical drift path is erratic, being continually interrupted by collisions 
which the deuteron makes with the atoms of the lattice, with other 
deuterons, atoms and molecules of deuterium, etc. However, the average 
of deuteron drifts in the presence of cathode overvoltage E0 is inward 
toward the center of the cathode. The vacated negative lattice site(s) 
becomes available as temporary store for other deuteron(s) spent of kinetic 
energy. This transfer function is the conductive mechanism of viviance; 
the nucleon is the conducting particle, the fixed lattice sites the 
conducting medium, and the cumulative absorbed kinetic energy the work. 

The argument is advanced that natural thermal dissociation of 
deuterides at polycrystalline and grain boundaries and at other crystal 
lattice imperfections is accelerated by kinetic encounter with newly 
arriving deuterons. This releases secondary deuterons to further propagate 
within the crystal. These nucleons tend to be repelled from crystals of 
higher positive charge toward neighbor crystals or grains of lesser charge 
and to drift along boundaries in the general direction of the field gradient 
of E0• Thus nucleon mobility, the interstitial capacity of the individual 
crystal to absorb nucleons, and the pathways of metallic boundaries to
the interior of the metal are the operative mechanics of viviance.

Systematic absorption continues until the internal charge Qi is in
equilibrium with the source charge Q0• Equilibrium may be reached before 
deuterons crowd to fusion depending on individual characteristics of 
palladium cathode specimens. 
656 


4. Alternate Model

The fusion of nuclei is more easily visualized from the Alternate 
Model (a logical extension of the Mayer/Jensen Shell Model) than from 
the generally accepted Standard Model of the atomic nucleus. 

The logic of the Standard Model constructs nucleons, protons (p) 
and neutrons (n), from sub nucleon particles. 

Simply explained, each 
nucleon is constructed of three quarks (electric charges) bound together 
by three gluons (carriers of the nuclear strong force). 

According to this 
model the atomic nucleus is a cluster or clump of nucleons bound together 
by the nuclear strong force of gluons. 

The logic of the Alternate Model constructs the neutron as the 
complement of the hydrogen (protium) atom; 
i.e., an electron captured 
inside a proton. 

The neutron's resultant internal electric field is the 
nuclear strong force. 

According to this model the atomic nucleus is a 
concentrici ty of individual nucleon fields, each confined to a distinct 
shell location by wave length and angular and spin momenta. The structure 
conforms to the Pauli exclusion principle, the principles of quantum 
mechanics, and with the exception of the protium nucleus is bound together 
by the neutron(s) internal field(s). 

Standard Model 
Alternate Model 
Figure 4. Models of the 
atomic nucleus. 


5. Crowding Nuclear Fusion

Cold fusion in an electrolysis cell is a deuteron to deuteron [d-d] 
reaction caused by Coulomb crowding. The products of the three possible 
d-d nuclear reactions are: 
1) [p + 3 HJ, 
2) [n + 3 He], and 
3) [4He +
gamma ray]. 

High energy deuteron fusion experiments have shown that 
reactions 1) and 2) occur in about even proportions. 

Reaction 3) is not 
expected as it requires even higher energies to occur. 

It is generally 
assumed that reactions 1) and 2) should always produce a 1 :1 branching 
ratio. 

Reported neutron observations in cold fusion experiments are 10-9 
to 10-6 of the expected product. 

Hence, it is concluded the absence of 
neutrons proves there is no nuclear reaction. This conclusion is specious. 

Reaction 2) does not occur in cold fusion, therefore no neutrons should 
be observed. 
657 
The interaction of the strong forces of the nuclei causes the nuclei 
to fuse. 

Fusion occurs when nuclei are crowded to within one nuclear 
diameter of one another even though they possess no kinetic energy. The 
[d-d] reaction in a crowded environment ( >..'- 10-12 cm.) is illustrated (in
accordance with the Alternate Model) in Figure 5. 

Two deuterons o+, 
thermally activated, move toward collision at time t
0• 
Their kinetic 
energies are small fractions of an electron volt. At time t_n+l the proton
(clear) and the neutron (hatched) of each deuteron 
are concentric about 
a common center. 

At some later time t_2 they remain centered, but the
neutrons internal fields distort in reaction to the Coulomb repulsion of 
the protons. 

Later at time t_l one proton overcomes the neutron field 
and breaks free of the common center. 

At time t
0 the overlap of the 
neutron strong forces begin to draw the neutrons toward a common center 
and the Coulomb repulsion of the two protons begins to move them apart. 

By time t+l the triton has formed and begun to "settle in" and both it
and the proton move apart with added kinetic energy from the fusion 
reaction. 
------- 0 
0 
p+ 
----- o-
T+
i 
t_2
t_l 
t 
t+l 
Figure 5. Model illustrating deuteron to deuteron fusion. 

The Alternate Model is used for ease of illustration. 

The same 
results 
can 
be 
demonstrated 
using 
the 
Standard 
Model 
but 
the 
conceptualism lends to ambiguity. 

The argument is that the inertial 
velocity possible for thermally excited deuterons in the micro dimensions 
of crowding precludes the collision of the proton components. 


6. Conclusion

It is concluded that the phenomena of cold fusion can and does 
occur. 

The reaction is a bulk effect. 

The physical mechanics are simple; 
almost primitive. 

Accumulation of absorbed kinetic deuterons can cause 
Coulomb crowding to reach [d-d] nuclear fusion reaction levels near the 
658 
center of high v1v1ance electrolysis cell cathodes. 

Most transitional 
metals (Ti to Ni, Zr to Pd, and Hf to Pt) exhibit viviance. 

The VIIIA 
metals Pd, Pt, and Ni in its f3 phase are unusually viviant. 

Because of 
the low kinetic energy of the fusing nucleons only the [d-d] > [p-t] 
reaction occurs. 

As a result the primary energy product is heat and the 
primary radiation product is tritium decay. 

The cold fusion cell is inherently small in size and power output as 
a result of the micro dimensions of the reaction. 

Large power sources 
will require batteries of cells. 

Any disadvantage from this should be 
largely offset by flexibility of sizing and independence of location. 

The 
lack of neutron radiation has positive environmental impact when compared 
to hot fusion reactions. 

Naturally solidified metals are marginally suitable for fusion cell 
experiments. 

Cathode 
metals 
with 
controlled 
and 
predictable 
characteristics would accelerate experimental progress. 

Cold fusion is one of the great discoveries of natural phenomena. 

With it comes the potential to open new physical realms beyond just the 
generation of energy. Much scientific credit is due Pons and Fleischmann 
for this discovery. 

