Introduction

Reports indicated that low level neutron
bursts occured in titanium [2] and palladium
[3]. Both experiments, designed to look at
neutron production from deuterium fusion,
created a highly stressed lattice prior to the
observed neutron bursts. Experiments were
designed by our group to take advantage of a
potentially large pressure buildup in the
crystalline lattice of metals created by phase
changes during a thermal shock from liquid
nitrogen temperature (-190 C) to 50 C. The
palladium hydride phase diagram is
distinctly different from that of titanium
hydride. Palladium hydride retains its face
centered structure throughout the few phase changes it experiences. The changes of
phase are simply a distortion of the
crystalline lattice from face centered cubic
to face centered tetragonal. Information on
titanium is not as plentiful as with palladium
but its hydride phase diagram is much more
complex, with phases going from hexagonal
close pack, to face centered cubic, to body
centered cubic, with intermediate phases
being combinations of these. Titanium,
containing a high level of hydrogen, will
have yet another phase transition between 77
and 300 K which can achieve greater than
60% atomic hydrogen loading at cryogenic
temperatures [4]. The experiments were
based on an interesting thermal shock
scenario. For example, if palladium were
saturated with hydrogen at liquid nitrogen
temperature (-199 C), the atom ratio of H/Pd
would approach 1. If the temperature were
quickly raised above 25 C, the internal
pressure would exceed 14 kilobar. Titanium
hydrides have not been as extensively
studied as palladium hydrides, and low
temperature charts are not available, but
given the complex phase structure of
titanium, the generation of high pressures
under thermal shock was thought to be
feasible. 


Experiment

Due to limited funding, the initial cryogenic
thermal shocking experiments used 42
grams of 99.5% pure titanium sponge (from
Alfa Aesar) which was broken into 1/8 inch
or smaller chips by hand and then placed in
a glass jar in an argon atomosphere. The jar
was agitated using a paint shaker for several
minutes and the pieces further fragmented.
A double walled chamber was built with the
inner container made of high pressure
copper tubing bent into a U shape and an
outer chamber made of 304 stainless steel. A T joint was placed on the ends of the Ushaped copper tubing. On one side there was
a loading port at the top of the T ( where the
titanium chips were loaded) and a gas
manifold on the side. On the other part of
the U a thermal couple was inserted and a
pressure guage

The test chamber was designed to be moved
from a liquid nitrogen bath and placed in the
center of a neutron counting chamber, using
two helium-3 detectors, designed to detect
low level neutron bursts. The helium-3 detector signals were
amplified, shaped and then sent to the ETC card in a Macintosh II computer and to a
decade counter. The ETC was designed to
achieve one microsecond resolution and a
32,000 count storage capacity [1]. It was
designed to run unattend until its storage
capacity was filled then to shut down. Data
was then transferred to a storage file on hard
drive. Afterwards the card could be cleared
and restarted. The decade counter simply
accumulated counts over a set period of
time. Once it reached its capacity of 1
million counts, it reinitialized and started the
count cycle over. Given that all experiments
had shown low level bursts, it was believed
that the 32,000 count capacity of the ETC
and the 1 million count capacity of the
decade counter were sufficient.


Results

Timing of the various measurements was
complicated. The computer clock was
started by software when the test chamber
was placed in the neutron counter. The
Temperature and pressure were timed and
observations recorded by a student with a
chronograph watch. The decade counter and
ETC were located in a Farday cage and the
signals were brought into the room with
BNC connectors. The student timed and
recorded the decade counter with a
chronograph watch. All times were
synchronized to a time zero corresponding
to the ETC start time.

A pressure loading with argon was run
where the test chamber was pressurized to
200 psi argon and then cooled in the LN2
bath until pressure and temperature reached
equilibrium. Then the test chamber was
loaded into the neutron counting unit and hot
water injected into the test chamber. The
results from this test are shown in Fig. 3.
The ETC data is plotted below the
temperature data. The decade counter
showed count rates consistent with the ETC
and prior extensive background counting
(where the background was on the order of
0.15 counts per second).

As shown in Table 1, a procedure for
loading the titanium with D2 was developed
to limit exothermic heat from the creation of
titanium deuteride. The D2 pressure was
slowly increased to 200 psi (the value was
closed at 200 psi) while simultaneously
running hot water (at 45 C). When the
temperature stabalized, the water was
drained and the test chamber was slowly
lowered into an Liquid Nitrogen (LN2) bath
on July 20, 1991 at 01:54. As temperature
dropped, the D2 pressure fell below 50 psi at
this point the D2 pressue was increased to
100 psi and the valve closed. The D2
pressure in the test chamber dropped and the
temperature increased. At 310 minutes the
decision was made to take the test chamber
from the LN2 bath and place it in the
neutron counter (even though pressure was
still dropping and temperature increasing
slowly). At 313 minutes, hot water was
injected into the chamber causing the
temperature to rise (Fig. 4). The hot water
circulated for 15 minutes and then was shut
off. The test chamber stayed in the neutron
counting chamber for three days with the
ETC and decade counter running. In the first
cycle the neutron counts were at background
level.

Since the test chamber was still showing
changes in pressure and temperature when the test chamber was removed from LN2
during the first cycle, we thought that the
chips had not been fully loaded. On July 23,
1991 at 18:42, the test chamber was then cooled to -186 C and the D2 pressure was
held at 50 psi for 160 minutes. The ETC was
started and at 163 minutes, the test chamber
was placed in the neutron detection chamber
and the hot water flow started. Due to a
freezing problem, the water flow was
restricted and the rate of temperature change
was reduced. As soon as the test chamber
was in the neutron counting chamber,
neutron counts were rapidly building up on
both the ETC and the decade counter. The ETC’s storage capacity was quickly
saturated. The ETC had to be manually
restarted about 42.8 seconds after saturation.
It again saturated in about 0.11 seconds. A
softwart glitch did not allow a restart after the second saturation. In the meantime the
decade counter had exceeded its one million
count capacity at least twice (the student
recording decade counter data was also the
student who had to restart the ETC so he
might have missed seeing a third saturation).
After 5 minutes of high counts, it was
decided to put the device back into the LN2
bath to slow the reaction rate down. 

The results from the second temperature
cycle is that at least 2,486,500 neutron
counts occurred during a five minute period.
The detector efficiecy was about 4% so this
would correspond to 62,163,000 neutrons.
An accurate neutron count was only possible
during the two brief periods while the ETC
was running. Fig. 5 shows the two points in
time where the ETC was saturated.

A third cycle was started by putting the test
chamber in a LN2 bath for 35 minutes
(cooled to -190 C). On July 23, 1991 at
19:25 the chamber was allowed to warm by
natural convenction. Everyone left for the night (due to fatigue) and returned 17 hours
later. The decade counter showed 50,883
counts and the ETC had saturated. The
decade counter could have recycled itself
multiple time during the event shown in Fig.
6 so the total count is at least 50,833, but
could have been much more. One small
neutron burst occurred within 10 seconds of
the convective warming process and a much
larger burst which saturated the ETC
occurred at 47,715 s into the cycle.

A fourth cycle was started on Wednesday
July 24, 1991 at 17:20. The test chamber
was cooled to -190 C for 190 minutes and
the D2 pressure held at 50 psi. The ETC was
started and the test chamber put into the
neutron counting chamber and at 20:25 hot
water was injected. A neutron burst was
seen about 10 s after the start of the heating
cycle (Fig. 7).

At this point we collected the D2 gas and
titanium samples to check for tritium content. One hour and 26 minutes after
removing the titanium, 9.6 grams of the
sample was placed in a Tri Carb 1600 TR
Liquid Scintillation Analyzer. The minimum
detectable amount for this unit was 2.9x10-6
micro Curie. The test sample yielded a
reading of 12.8x10-6 micro Curi. A control
sample of the titanium yielded a reading of
11.9x10-6
 micro Curi. Even though there was
a difference of 0.9x10-6 micro Curi, it was
not deamed statistically significant.


Discussion and Conclusions 

Cryogenically cooled metals under thermal
shock yielded promising results. Three
cooling and heating cycles using titanium
yielded neutron counts significantly above
background. The ETC was able to pinpoint
when the bursts occurred and the count rate
at the time of the burst. In the second cycle,
a sustained burst of neutrons were observed
that twice saturated the 32K storage limit of
the ETC before a software failure and a
decade counter at least twice exceeded it’s
one million count capacity during the five
minute period. The neutron production
might have been sustained longer had we not put the test chamber back into the LN2 bath
in order to try to stop the reaction. At
minimum, this event yielded a minimum of
2,486,500 neutron counts (the student who
was observing the decade counter was busy
trying to restart the ETC and may have
missed additional cycling of the decade
counter). Our goal was to test other metals
capable of forming hydrides (e.g.,
palladium). However, the experiments were
discontinued due to circumstances beyond
our control. 

As part of the Sydney Kimel Institute for the
Nuclear Rennacance, a continuation of the
cryogenically cooled metals under thermal
shock experiments are continuing. A team
including Dr. Lukosi is developing a next
generation testing system—some of which
will be reported at future meetings and in
future publications.
