1. Introduction
Spectroscopy is a key diagnostic in a variety of fields, including plasma physics, astrophysics, chemistry, and materials
science. If a system is in thermal equilibrium, then it is may be possible to determine the plasma temperature from the
relative intensity of different emission lines. At low density the atomic and ionic levels may not be in equilibrium, but
in some cases it possible to determine both the temperature and electron density from the relative strengths of strong
emission lines.

Spectroscopy has so far not played a particularly important role in Fleischmann–Pons experiments, which is unfortunate
since it is such a powerful tool. There have been reported observations of Kα radiation from Pd [1] and from
Pt [1,2] in Fleischmann–Pons experiments. Such observations are important because they give us the possibility of
learning new things about the physical mechanisms behind the anomalies.

At present we do not understand why such radiation should occur. One possibility is that they are produced as a
result of impact ionization from energetic particles. If so, then the X-ray emission could be considered as a secondary
process which can be used as a diagnostic for the presence of energetic particles. Alternatively, it may be that X-ray
emission occurs for some other reason, in which case it would be of interest to understand better what energetic process
could result in the production of Kα emission.

For other reasons we have examined issues associated with nuclear radiation in general that would be expected in
energetic alpha particles were present in large quantities in the Fleischmann–Pons experiment. It had been conjectured
that the excess heat comes about from new reactions which result in energetic alpha particle emission in a way such
that the energetic alpha particles are "hidden" deep within the PdD. We calculated the yields for a variety of reactions
which would result in neutron, X-ray and γ -ray production. From a comparison with experiments in which excess heat
was observed while nuclear emissions were being detected, we were able to conclude that the upper limit on the alpha
particle energy must be less than 10 keV in order to be consistent with experiment.

As a result of this exercise, it became clear that spectroscopic diagnostics were available for energetic alpha particles.
In particular, energetic alpha particles should produce Kα X-rays as well as the 478 keV line in 7Li. Moreover, it should
be possible to develop an estimate for the energy from measurements of the ratios of the different transitions. Since
energetic alpha particles would also produce neutrons, one would expect a correlation between all of the different
signals.

Now, there are experiments in which energetic alpha particles have been reported [3,4]. There are also experiments
in which neutrons and X-rays have been reported. Previously we were interested in the correlation between excess
power and nuclear radiation. Here, we are instead interested in the possible correlation between different low-level
X-ray, gamma-ray and neutron emission. In what follows we will discuss results for yields of X-rays and γ -rays from
energetic alpha particles. Based on these calculations, and from the few available experimental results, we conclude
that the Kα radiation is not due to energetic alpha particles. Some other mechanism should be sought to account for
them.


2. Impact ionization and Kα emission

X-ray emission resulting from bombardment by energetic ions is a subject that has been well studied for many years.
In the case of alpha particle-induced K-shell X-ray emission, we can make use of the measurements of Wilson et al.
[5], which is available in a relevant energy range for Rh and Ag (which are close to Pd).

To obtain results for Pd, we could interpolate data taken for nearby elements. There is considerable literature on the
closely related problem of scaling laws for impact ionization of K-shell electrons [6]. The basic idea is that there exists
an underlying scaling law that depends on a universal function, from which K-shell impact ionization cross sections
for many elements can be obtained over a wide range of energies [7].

2.1. Universal function:
To proceed, we would like to take advantage of ideas based on the notion that there exists a universal function for
alpha particle-impact K-shell ionization. Certainly there is considerable literature both of a theoretical nature as well
as experimental devoted to this problem. There are a number of speciﬁc universal functions which have been put forth
based on different data sets or theoretical models.

For our computations in particular, we have the problem that the data sets which are close to Pd do not go up to high
enough energy for our application. Hence our interest is in making an empirical extension of the model in which we
used scaled experimental data in the higher energy regime as a way to predict what the cross section would be for Pd.

To proceed, we write
where f is the presumed universal function, U is the K-shell binding energy and where ωK is the ﬂuorescence yield.

Figure 1.
Universal function f (in units of barns-eV) built up from K-shell X-ray production cross sections for collisions with alpha particles.

To determine whether this approach will be helpful given the data sets that we have available, we can plot the data
in terms of the universal function according to
as a function of E/U. The results of this are shown in Fig. 1.

2.2. Parameterization:
We see that the data seems to describe a universal curve, which we have ﬁt to
ln f = a + bx + cx2
with
and
a = − 22.7185,
b = 8.4285,
c = − 0.3995
for f in barns-eV.

Figure 2.
Comparison of the empirical X-ray cross section (red line) and data of Wilson et al. [5] for Rh (upper) and Ag (lower) data.

2.3. Comparison with experimental results:
We compare the empirical model with the data of Wilson et al. [5] in Fig. 2. Taking the Wilson data alone, one might
think that the empirical ﬁt was a bit off at both high and low energy. However, since there is reasonable agreement
between different data sets (with data taken between Al and Gd) in the construction of the universal function, it seems
that our empirical Kα cross section for Pd should be reasonable outside of the range where we have relevant data.


3. Yield of Pd Kα X-rays

We have computed the yield function for alpha particles in Pd (see Fig. 3).

3.1. Experimental result for the yield in Pd:
There is an experimental data point available for the yield function of energetic alpha particles from the decay of 252Cf
given in a paper by Watson [8]. The yield function is given as (0.93 ± 0.08) × 10−2 for the associated long range alpha
particles in Pd. From the yield curve, we would compute that the associated alpha particle energy should be 15.0 MeV
in order to be consistent. The long-range alpha particle energy spectrum for 252Cf has been measured by Fraenkel [9],
and one sees that the peak occurs roughly at 15 MeV.

Figure 3.
Yield function for Pd K-shell X-ray emission due to energetic alpha particles as a function of alpha particle energy.

3.2. K X-rays per unit energy:
In order to compare with experiment, we require a computation of the yield divided by the energy, we require the
K-shell X-ray yield divided by the alpha particle energy. This is shown in Fig. 4.

Figure 4.
Yield function for K-shell X-rays in Pd produced by energetic alpha particles divided by the alpha particle energy, in X-rays/J.

Figure 5.
Ratio of Kα production cross sections for Pt relative to Pd as a function of alpha particle energy.

3.3. Ratio of Pd to Pt Kα cross sections:
We mentioned above the possibility of gaining information about the alpha particle energy from the ratio of Kα emission
from Pt as compared with Pd. There are few experiments where both have been measured at the same time, and the
only work we could ﬁnd reporting such a result was [1].

If we make use of the universal function ideas above, we can estimate the ratio of K-shell emission cross sections
using

This ratio is shown in Fig. 5. We see that the cross section for X-ray production is much larger for the lower energy Pd
Kα X-ray than for the higher energy Pt Kα X-ray, which is as expected since it is harder to ionize a more tightly bound
electron.

3.4. Surface versus bulk effects:
The discussion above requires additional comment, since Pt is found only within less than a micron from the outer
surface of the Pd cathode. If the alpha particles are born inside of the cathode away from the surface, then one would
not expect to see any Pt Kα X-rays. If the alpha particles are born near the cathode surface, then one might expect to see
excitation of the Pt Kα, but the ratio of Pd to Pt Kα emission might be expected to be even larger than the ratios found
above. In the single experimental measurement that shows both, there is not a big difference in the relative strength, as
discussed later on in this work. With Pt restricted to a small region near the surface, the Pd Kα should be favored even
more over the Pt Kα than in Fig. 5.

Figure 6.
Cross section for 7Li 478 keV gamma production as a function of alpha particle energy.


4. Excitation of the 7Li nuclear state at 478 keV

If energetic alpha particles are present, one would expect to see excitation of nuclear states for low-Z nuclei that have
bound excited states. In the Fleischmann–Pons experiment Li appears in the electrolyte, and presents an obvious
candidate for possible nuclear excitation. In 7Li the lowest excited state occurs at 478 keV, which makes it the prime
candidate for nuclear excitation (other excited states in both 6Li and in 7Li are at signiﬁcantly higher energy). This
state has been the focus of numerous studies over the years precisely for this reason.

4.1. Cross section for gamma production:
Because of its special status, the 478 keV gamma line has been studied experimentally in order to determine the gamma
production cross section. This is somewhat different than an excitation cross section, as excitation to more highly
excited states can lead to the 478 keV state as a product in a decay chain. We have made use of the measurements of Li
and Sherr [10], and of Cusson [11]. The cross section is complicated, with more than a dozen resonances apparent. We
have made use of the Li and Sherr data at low energy up to the ﬁrst peak. Above the ﬁrst peak, we have developed an
approximate ﬁt (made up of many resonance terms) to the Cusson measurements. The resulting cross section is shown
in Fig. 6.

4.2. Yield function:
Lithium is present in the LiOD electrolyte as mentioned above, and it also is incorporated into the outer few thousand
Angstroms of the cathode surface [12,13]. We expect the alpha particles to be sourced near the surface, so that there
is some possibility of interaction with the Li incorporated into the Pd. However, alpha particles born this close to the
surface will also have a 50% probability of going into the electrolyte. The computation of the yield function in the
electrolyte is a preferable computation for us (since we need not worry about the proﬁle of the lithium and the trajectory
of the alpha particles), and we expect that it will provide the dominant signal under most conditions.

Figure 7.
Yield of the 7Li 478 keV gamma production as a function of alpha particle energy.

The resulting yield function for alpha particles slowing down in D2O are shown in Fig. 7 for 0.1 M and 1.0 M
LiOD. For alpha particles of energy greater than 2 MeV, we see that the yields are small, but respectable for this kind
of process. Clearly a substantial ﬂux of alpha particles would be required to observe this signal. However, large yields
of alpha particles are now being claimed by Storms and Scanlan [14], and by the SPAWAR group [4]. It is probably
worthwhile to look for the 478 keV line in these experiments. The associated yield per unit energy is shown in Fig. 8.


5. Discussion and conclusions

In the sections above, we have presented results for cross sections and yields of Kα X-rays and the 7Li 478 keV gamma
ray. Given the good accuracy of the stopping power models and cross sections, the resulting yields should be very good.

From these results, some conclusions can be drawn. In regard to ongoing experiments, it would be interesting to
monitor the Kα signals and 7Li signal, since they can provide independent information about the ﬂux and energy of
energetic particles. Although we have focused on energetic alpha particles here, similar yield functions for the Kα
X-rays can be developed easily for other energetic ions. Excitation cross sections for the 478 keV line will be much
more difﬁcult to obtain for other light ions. These results also allow us to comment on the experiments showing Kα
emission. Although important information about the Bush and Eagleton experiment [1] is not included in the write up,
if we assume that the Rh, Pd and Ag Kα spectrum were taken in the same run as the Pt Kα spectrum, then we can be
sure that these signals were not due to energetic alpha particle impact ionization. The reason for this is that the signal
strength of the Pt appears to be comparable to that of Pd, which is inconsistent with what would be expected from alpha
particle impact ionization (even if there were as much Pt as Pd available near the surface). Since the X-ray detection in
this experiment has a relatively low resolution, there can be questions as to whether the signals are actually due to the
Kα lines.

The presence of the Rh Kα line at similar strength to the Ag Kα line is very hard to account for in this experiment
since the cathode was a PdAg alloy. In any event, we will need a conﬁrmation of this experiment before we can be sure
of our conclusions. In future investigations of Kα emission it will be important to use a high resolution detector so that
the Kα and Kβ lines can be resolved, so that we might have more conﬁdence in the results.

Figure 8.
Yield of the 7Li 478 keV gamma production divided by energy as a function of alpha particle energy.

Also of interest is the spectrum presented by Iwamura et al. [2], which shows clearly a dominant Pt Kα signal, but
no 478 keV line. If produced by energetic alpha particles, probably the alpha particles would need to have an energy
well above 2 MeV. Since there is no correlation with neutron emission, which was also measured, we are sure from
other calculations that the Pt Kα signal is not associated with energetic alpha particle emission.

We draw attention to an earlier publication which contains a brief summary of these and earlier results [15].


References

[1] R. T. Bush and R. D. Eagleton, Proc. ICCF3 409 (1993).
[2] Y. Iwamura, N. Gotoh, T. Itoh and I. Toyoda,  Proc. ICCF5, p. 197 (1995).
[3] A. G. Lipson, G. H. Miley, A. S. Roussetski and E. I. Saunin, Proc. ICCF3, p. 539 (2003).
[4] P. Mosier-Boss and L. P. G. Forsley, Bull. APS paper BAPS.2008.MAR.A17.10 (2008).
[5] S. R. Wilson, F. D. McDaniel, J. R. Rowe and J. L. Duggan, Phys. Rev. A 16 (1977) 903.
[6] J. D. Garcia, Phys. Rev. A 4 (1971) 955.
[7] G. Basbas, W. Brandt and R. Laubert, Phys. Rev. A 7 (1973) 983.
[8] R. L. Watson, Phys. Rev. 179 (1969) 1109.
[9] Z. Fraenkel, Phys. Rev. 156 (1967) 1283.
[10] C. W. Li and R. Sherr, Phys. Rev. 96 (1954) 389.
[11] R. Y. Cusson, A study of the elastic and inelastic scattering of alpha particles by lithium-7, CalTech Ph.D. Thesis (1965).
[12] O. Yamazaki, H. Yoshitake, N. Kamiya, K. Ota, J. Electroanal. Chem. 390 (1995) 127.
[13] H. Uchida, M. Sato, W. Cui, T. Tabata, M. Kumagai, H. Takano and T. Kondo, J. Alloys and Compounds 293–295 (1999) 30.
[14] E. Storms and B. Scanlan, presented at ICCF15.
[15] P. Hagelstein, Naturwissenschaften 97 (2010) 345.
