ABSTRACT

Experimental research and evaluation of three electrode (triode) cold fusion
electrolysis cells is reported herein. Apparatus development began, after patent
application, 05 June 1995. The triode apparatus introduces controlled loading and
operation of Fleischmann/Pons-type (F/P) cells. In August 1995 excess heat generation
was observed in initial triode apparatus experiments conducted by Dr. Dennis Cravens
in his New Mexico laboratory. In November 1995 the Boiler Works laboratory in
Diamondhead began experimental evaluation of the triode apparatus. A series of
experiments in December, January and February led to development of a functioning
triode fusion reactor. The reactor was put into operation 20 March 1996 and operated
continuously until 23 August 1996. Over the five months of operation of the reactor
several experiments were preformed and over 65,000 data points were recorded. This
data base is being applied in further triode apparatus developments.

A second reactor test bed for "quick change" cathode specimen evaluation is in
operation. Thin film cathode specimens prepared by the Materials Science and
Engineering Laboratory of the University of Alabama in Birmingham are presently being
evaluated. These include Pd film on Ag, Al, Cu, and quartz substrates and Pt films on Si
bead specimens. Engineering design of a 2 KW reactor cell is underway.

Details of triode apparatus operation, control, and experimental results are reported.
The general design approach to the 2 KW reactor is described. It is concluded that
suf-ficient experimental and theoretical understandings of cold fusion exist
for engineering design and development of water heating appliances.


1. 1 ntroduction

The concept of the triode cell and the laboratory experiments reported herein are all
guided by the Crowded Deuterium Model (COM) construct presented by the author at
ICCF-3 in Nagoya, Japan in 1992. The reader should be informed that while COM
theory enjoys significant peer review and critique that it is not a generally accepted
concept nor is it rigorously proven in principle. Nevertheless, it has proved to be a useful
tool for the visualization of F/P mechanics and for the design of devices and
experiments. The COM concept teaches that F/P is a bulk effect occurring within
structural domains encompassed by at least one or more palladium hydride envelop(s);
that often such domains occur naturally in polycrystalline palladium (Pd) saturated with
nuclei of the hydrogens; that if hydrogen nuclei are sufficiently rich in deuterons; if the geometry of the structure is appropriate; and the random distribution of polycrystalline
boundaries internal to the domain are propitious; that then deuterons may be crowded
to nuclear fusion within the structure. Satisfying this set of particular conditions makes
F/P experiments difficult to preform and extremely difficult to repeat. Furthermore, even
when all other conditions are positive the last condition, favorable boundaries within the
domain, is of such low probability that most domains reach internal Coulomb equilibrium
and block before enough deuterons are absorbed to crowd to ·fusion. Finally, even with
favorable boundary distributions, deuteron loading and sustainment of fusion may be
erratic; i.e., sometimes rapid, sometimes sluggish, and sometimes blocked until
equilibrium is internally or externally disturbed.

Fleischmann and Pons taught diode electrolysis of heavy water could be used to
achieve low temperature nuclear fusion using a Pd cathode in a diode cell. Numerous
experiments have since demonstrated generation of excess heat using various
methods of electrolysis, gas discharge, and solid state with diode apparatuses. All
methods encounter the conditional difficulties previously described. The diode
characteristic of common anode/cathode current affords limited possibilities for control.
The triode apparatus - two anodes; one cathode - improves methods to load, ignite,
sustain, and control the F/P effect. Most important; triode control overcomes blocking.
Diode and triode apparatus characteristics are schematically illustrated in Fig. 1.


2. Methods

Cell shadings in Figures 1 and 2 illuminate electrostatic gradients from positive, dark,
to negative, light. Diodes are limited to cathode current control whereas the triode can be 
modulated by varying the anode voltages A and B as well as by manipulation of the 
cathode current. This is particularly meaningful when one contemplates the relatively 
uniform current density characteristic of cathode surfaces in most electrolysis and gas 
discharge, and many solid state devices. In Figure 2, four examples schematically 
illustrate gradient control across a triode cathode cross section with independent 
anodes A and B at different operating potentials. Figures 2(a) and 2(d) illustrate the 
conventional method of cathode current modulation where anode voltages A and B are 
at the same potential. Figures 2(b) and 2(c) show how voltage potentials to anodes A 
and B may be alternated so as to cause the cross section gradient to sweep, or vary 
sinusoidally, exponentially, in step function, or in other manner. 

Switching and 
frequency rates can also be varied. These modulation methods enhance loading, 
ignition, sustenance, and control of F/P fusion cells by overcoming Coulomb equilibrium. 
541 
JCCF-6 October IJ-18, 1996 Japan I 
Fundamental Session 
Excess Energy and Nuclear Products 
A +
s++ 
A++ 
a+ 
C 
C 
Figure 2. Current control [(a) and (d)]; Voltage control [(b) and (c)]. 

A simplified electrode configuration for a F/P triode cell is depicted in Figure 3 (a) and 
(b). the Boiler Works experimental cells are designed to mount cathode specimens 2.5 
x 2.5 x 0.1 centimeters or smaller in a Teflon cathode frame. The cathode frame inserts 
between Teflon anode frames with eleven 0.051 centimeter diameter platinum wires. 

Other geometries are possible; the preferred embodiment is of different geometry. 

CATHODE 
ANODE 
B 
(b) 
CATHODE 
ANODE 
A 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
ANODE 
B 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Figure 3. (a) Triode electrode configuration; (b) Triode cell cross section. 

Two laboratory test beds are in operation. The block diagram of Figure 4 identifies the 
functional elements and organization of the long term facility. These are two hp 361 XA 
constant current power supplies, a function generator which programs the hp 361 XA 
FUNCTION i-----(3 WIRE 
CHAMBER 
GENERATOR 
Figure 4. hp current supplies, function generator and environmental chamber. 
542 
I JCCF-6 October n-18, 1996 Japan 
Fundamental Session 
Excess Energy and Nuclear Products 
current levels and the three (A, B, and C) output currents to the triode cell, and an 
environmental chamber. The "quick change" cathode test bed, is not described herein. 
tr 
PUMP 
SUMP • 
IN 
NODE - A 
ATHOOE 
ANODE - 8 
CHAMBER 
Figure 5. Flow.through heat exchanger and environmental chamber organization. 

Long term testing utilizes flow through calorimetry in which gravity fed clean water 
flows into the chamber, through the cell heat exchanger, and discharges into a sump. A 
pump returns water to the reservoir. The background diagram in Figure 5 shows this 
circulation system. The foreground of Figure 5 illustrates details of the chamber, the cell, 
and temperature sensor locations. Cooling water flow rate is regulated by a valve and 
discharge is manually measured and recorded with each set (see Figure 5) of 
temperature data. The cell is thermally isolated within the chamber in a "barrel" 
enclosure. The chamber further isolates this enclosure from the laboratory environment. 

Chamber temperature is regulated and is stabilized by a two liter tank of ballast water. In 
the cell the triode structure is mounted inside the heat exchanger coil and both structures 
are completely immersed in heavy water. Gasses are vented through ports in the cell, 
the barrel, and the chamber enclosure. The electrolyte is 99.9% D20 diluted with 0.1 
mol of LiOH. Volume is 80 ml., replenished periodically when reaching a 70 ml. level. 


3. Results

Patent application on the triode apparatus was filed 05 June 1995. A test cell was
designed at the Boiler Works in June. Parts for two cells were fabricated in Houston, 
Texas in July. In late July the first F/P effect cell was assembled and calibrated by Dr. 

Dennis Cravens in his Cloudcroft , New Mexico laboratory. The first calibrated open cell 
test began loading on Thursday, 27 July. At 10:52 AM, MDT, Tuesday 01 August cell 
resistance began to drop and cell temperature began to rise. At 12:13 PM excess heat 
was measured at 40%; at 12:29 PM at 84%, and at 01 :18 PM after cell temperature was 
stabilized excess heat was calculated at 267%. On 02 August the cell was restarted. 

Maximum excess heat measured was 40%. Subsequent tests on 03 August produced 
null results. Bipolar triode and fibrous nickel cathode tests were also inconclusive. 
543 
ICCF-6 October JJ-18, 1996 Japan '
Fundamental Session 
Excess Energy and Nuclear Products 
In November the Boiler Works laboratory in Diamondhead began calibrated open cell 
experimental evaluation of triode apparatuses. These experiments were inconclusive. 

At 08:03 PM, 13 December temperature began to rise rapidly in a cell test begun on 1 0 
December. 

By 12:02 AM, 14 December, with cell temperature at 200 degrees 
Fahrenheit, input power was switched to a minimal level. Efforts to repeat the anomaly 
went empty. The test was terminated on 15 December to clear the chamber for a test cell 
with a 5 micron Pd on silver (Ag) substrate cathode. This test, the first flow through 
calorimetry experiment, began on 23 December. The test was fraught with unexpected 
complications, miscalculations, and learning; however all new instrumentation worked 
precisely and excellent records were logged. The vexatious problem was absolute 
absence of any evidence of excess heat. This experiment terminated on 13 January. A 
second Pd on Ag cathode cell was calibrated on 07 February and put on test on 1 0 
February. This experiment ended on 13 March, again without evidence of excess heat. 

These experiments informed, albeit they evidenced no excess heat. In all tests 
versatility of triode control accelerated loading. A ranging investigation of F/P cathode 
characteristics through adjustments of triode voltages and switching rates provided 
experimental results to compare with theory. This review suggested the design of solid 
Pd cathodes be revisited. New Pd cathodes were designed. The first of these went on 
test at 08:28 PM, 20 March. At 02:03 AM, 21 March excess heat generation was 
observed. During the next week of operation cell output was 200% of input. Gain 
gradually increased to 500% with operation and better informed control. The reactor 
was in continuous operation until deliberately shut down 23 August 1996. 

Evaluation of thin film cathodes is in progress in a reactor test bed dedicated to "quick 
change" cathode specimen testing. Thin film cathode specimens prepared by the 
Materials Science and Engineering Laboratory of the University of Alabama in 
Birmingham include Pd film on Ag, Al, Cu, and quartz substrates and Pt films on Si bead 
specimens. To date, these experiments have not exhibited generation of excess heat. 

In June engineering design of a prototype modular cell for application in water heating 
appliances was begun. The design goal is a 2 KW equivalent thermal output reactor cell 
for battery application in water heating systems. Market study, equipment specifications, 
cost analysis, and engineering layout were initiated in late July. Figure 6 illustrates the 
design approach which elaborates on the basic cell design of the March to August tests. 
{-i C cathodes ,✓
/'HEAT 
XCHG 
Anode B
.......,.....__...._.,_ .............. __ 
Cathode 1 
r ............... -----....c;...._;.;a,.__.....&...:,Anode A
Cathode 2 
Anode B 
(a)
Cell cross section
(+) A 
(+) B (anodes) 
(b) 
544 
Figure 6. End (a) and exploded (b) views of 2 kilowatt cell design approach . 
j 1cCF-6 October IJ-18, 1996 japan 


4. Discussion 

Conceptually triode apparatus mechanics avail means to overcome and control blocking 
during F/P cell loading and operation. Experimental success in improved loading and control 
tend to confirm the concept. Longevity, stability, and cell control demonstrated in the March 
through August experiment were particularly encouraging. Data gathered during this 
experiment create an extensive operational data base for advanced apparatus design. It is 
further encouraging that other laboratories plan to conduct triode experiments. 

A second reactor test bed for "quick change" cathode specimen evaluation is in 
operation. Thin film cathode specimens prepared by the Materials Science and Engineering 
Laboratory of the University of Alabama in Birmingham are presently being evaluated. These 
include Pd film on Ag, Al, Cu, and quartz substrates and Pt films on Si bead specimens. 

Engineering design of a 2 KW reactor cell is underway. 


5. Conclusion 

Triode control accelerates loading, overcomes F/P cell blocking, and relieves 
experimental uncertainties heretofore attributed to cathode specimen incongruities. Triode 
experiments should lead to faster, more certain, and consistent results. Elimination of the 
"reproducibility" paradox should speed development and acceptance of F/P technology. 

Much remains to be done in development of cathode materials and fabrication techniques. 

Additionally, the state and behavior of condensed matter in the fusion locale is not well 
understood and must be further investigated. Nevertheless, sufficient experimental and 
theoretical understanding exists to begin engineering design and development of water 
heating appliances for practical uses. 


6. References 

[1] Fleischmann, M., Pons, S., and Hawkins, M., Electrochemically Induced Nuclear Fusion 
of Deuterium, J. of Electroanal.. Chemistry, 261, 301 (1989). 
[2] Ragland, E., Theory of Crowding Fusion, Nuclear Physics Review, Mississippi State 
University, May (1991). 
[3] Bush, R., Cold Fusion Report, ICCF-2, Como, Italy, June (1991) 
[4] Takahashi, A., Nuclear Products by D2O/Pd Electrolysis and Multibody Fusion, Proc. Int. 

Symp. Nonlinear Phenom. In Electromagnetic Fields, ISEM, Nagoya, 1992 
[5] Ragland, E., Cain, B., and Gu, A., Transport of the Hydrogens in Transition Metals, 
National Science Foundation, Washington, D.C., April, (1992). 
[6] Tamaki, M. and Tasaka, K., Field Formation of the Condensed Matter Fusion by Electro-
Transport of Deuterium in Palladium, ICCF-3, Nagoya, Japan, October (1992). 
[7] Ragland, E., A Physical Description of Cold Fusion, ICCF-3, Nagoya, Japan, October 
(1992). 
