1. INTRODUCTION

We have examined mechanisms for the coherent neutron capture onto, and the
coherent neutron removal, from nuclei in the presence of a lattice. Under fairly
restrictive circumstances, it appears to be possible to satisfy both energy and momentum
conservation requirements between the microscopic nuclear system and the
macroscopic lattice such that coherent nuclear ,energy transfer to and from the lattice
occurs.

This mechanism enables coherent neutron donor and acceptor reactions to occur,
with deuterium as the optimum donor nucleus. Coherent reaction pathways
leading to heat, tritium, and helium generation are proposed: Heat generation in
Pons-Fleischmann cells would result from coherent neutron capture onto 6Li in the
lattice; tritium generation would result from coherent neutron capture onto deuterium;
coherent neutron capture onto 7Li would lead to 8Li, which would beta
decay to 8 Be, and ultimately alpha decay to form two 4 He nuclei.

Semi-coherent reactions, in which the neutron capture part of the reaction would
yield energetic products, are also proposed to account for fast triton production and
secondary fast neutron generation .

The present conference proceedings contains a very abreviated version of results
and discussions that will appear elsewhere. For detailed references, extended
discussions, further comments about notation, etc., the reader is referred to Ref. 1.

2. Coherent Neutron Capture in the Presence of a Lattice

The coherent transfer of a neutron to or from a nucleus in the presence of a lattice 
in our model is mediated by an electromagnetic transition as depicted in Figure 1. 
The initial state for coherent neutron removal would include a donor nucleus X and 
an initial lattice Lx; the final state would include a product nucleus Y, a Bragg state 
neutron, and a final state lattice Ly. The transition between the initial state and 
final state is mediated through near-field d • E or µ • B hamiltonians, with the electric 
or magnetic fields being long wavelength macroscopic fields imposed externally, or 
in the case of electric fields, perhaps arising internally. 

Figure 1. Feynmann-like diagram for a single coherent neutron transfer reaction. 

The transition hamiltonian which corresponds to the magnetic version of this 
process is described in second quantization through fLµ,B, which is
where the nucleon field operators are defined elsewhere1; for example
The center of mass position is determined as a function of the phonon mode ampli-
tudes through Ri = R? + Lm CJmU m(i)
Upon substituting in our expressions for the various operators which occur in
the transition operator we obtain
where the first magnetic dipole operator appearing in this equation is defined by 

Some brief discussion of the physical content of this model is in order; the model
describes a transfer of a neutron from X whose center of mass is located "at" Rf;, 
resulting in the product nucleus Y whose center of mass is located "at" R.ri. The
positions of the initial and final state nuclei are determined by the degree of lattice
excitation and by the lattice displacement vectors, both of which will differ between
the initial and final states due to the neutron transfer. The spatial overlap integral
given in equation (2.4) ensures that a transfer occurs only when the initial and final
center of mass coincide to within fermis; no transfer occurs for large separation.
Hence, the magnetic dipole operator is a highly nonlinear function of the lattice
phonon mode amplitudes; we have fou11d an approximate Gaussian dependence on 
relative separation (µ ~ e-½BIRf-Iln2
, with Bon the order of fermi-2)


3. Energy and Momentum Transfer Between Nuclei and a Lattice

The fundamental theoretical dilemma that presents itself is: how can a large 
MeV nuclear energy quanta can be transferred to a lattice whose energy levels 
are quantized on the meV scale? Our initial efforts were focussed on transferring 
the energy one phonon quanta at a time; this approach, however, appears to be 
unproductive. The only alternative is to transfer the nuclear quanta in a single 
step, which requires a large nonperturbative nonlinearity on the part of the lattice 
in order to accept the energy. 

We may view the neutron transfer process as involving a collision between a 
lattice and a nucleus; the hamiltonian for the lattice may be taken to be of the form 
The lattice is composed of a large set of oscillators, each with mode amplitude qm and 
momentum Pm· We may construct a large dimensional vector q from the individual 
mode amplitudes q = Lm imqm which would represent the position of the lattice in 
a N-dimensional space where N is the total number og phonon modes. The nucleus 
exists in 3-space, but since the center of mass position coordinates are functions 
of the phonon mode amplitudes, the nuclear scattering potential is mapped into 
the N-dimensional space as indicated in the above hamiltonian. As a result, the 
problem that we are interested in analyzing is basically of simple inelastic collisions 
in q-space between the lattice and nucleus. 

We know from an analysis of kinematics in 3-D that energy and momentum must 
be separately conserved, and that the constraints imposed through conservation 
determine the essential features of the reaction. We would like to understand how 
energy and momentum conservation works in this case, especially since it is generally 
believed that the low energy phonon modes of the lattice cannot accept a nuclear 
energy quantum; the arguments against this ultimately have to do with whether 
energy and momentum can be conserved simultaneously. 

We may formulate the problem simply: we require that 
and 
be satisfied at the same time, where Ei and E1 are the total initial and final lattice 
energies, and where Pi and p 1 are the total N-dimensional lattice momenta. The 
nuclear energy transfer is  EN. The lattice may be thought of for the purposes of 
the present argument as a wave incident on a time-dependent perturbation localized 
around the origin in q-space; diffraction effects give rise to  P- We find that energy 
and momentum can be matched simultaneously since 
by the uncertainty principle. 

The diffraction of the lattice off of the localized nuclear potential in q-space is re­
sponsible for the momentum transfer, and we have argued here that this momentum 
transfer can be consistent with the large energy transfer since the phonon mode am­
plitudes must be localized to within fermis for a coherent neutron transfer reaction 
to take place. The effect is purely quantum mechanical, since it is diffractive, with 
no classical analog. The arguments given above can also give constraints on lattice 
size and total lattice energy required for transitions to occur: these constraints entail 
the requirement that many modes must be present so that the momentum transfer 
to each is small, and that sufficient energy be present in each mode so that in an 
endothermic reaction the energy is available for extraction. We shall discuss these 
issues further elsewhere. 

References 
P. L. Hagelstein, "Coherent and Semi-Coherent Neutron Transfer reactions.
I-IV," submitted to J. Fusion Tech. (1991).
