CONCEPT OF TARGET MATERIAL CHOICE FOR NUCLEAR REACTIONS
IN CONDENSED MEDIA

V.A.Romodanov, V.I.Savin, S.G.Korneev
142100 Podolsk, Moscow Region, Zheleznodorozhnaya 24,
SRI of SPA LUTCH


ABSTRACT

On the basis good and reproducibility tritium generation results
which gett in condition of the high densities glow discharge to
begin studying the influence of different parameters of the
deuteron and the base atom interaction process on the nuclear
reactions in condensed media (NRCM) efficiency.

The possibility of choosing the most efficient materials is
discussed on the basis of the model proposed before.

The heaviest elements of Mendeleev's periodic system are shown
to be the most promising materials for NRCM.

The practical results obtained when using a powerful glow discharge
have been considered. They verify the above-mentioned
hypothesis and the features of realizing the promising properties
of the materials for NRCM.


1. INTRODUCTION

Most of the experiments on nuclear reactions in condensed media (NRCM) are made when using pallasium, titanium or nickel
as base materials and their reproducibility isn't high. When
usinf other materials, the results are more contradictory and
the required number of the models, where the NRCM rate dependence
on the base material type is discussed, isn't available.

The "swimming" electron model by H.Hora supposes that the maximum
shielding effect of Coulomb potential for the interacting
deuterons is achieved as a result of the electron accumulation
either on the solid surface or at the joint of the material
surfaces having different Fermi energy levels /1/. The compositions
of nickel-cerium, iron-cerium and titanium-cerium layers
10-30 nm thick are considered the most efficient. However, to
verify this concept at rather low energies the layers should
be very thin, perhaps, due to this fact the first experiments
were performed when using the plasma focus where the energy
level of the bombarding ions could be rather high.

The material efficiency in Bazhutov-Vereshkov model is under
discussion. The existence of heavy "erzion" particles which
can be used as nuclear reaction catalysts is supposed in this
model /2/. This model verifies the prospects of such materials
as palladium and nickel and proposes the compositions of the
materials in which one of them deliver the catalyst particles
and the others consume them. Copper and iron aren't considered
promising materials for the NRCMs within this model. One hasn't
enough experimental data for verifying this model yet.

A.S.Davydov in his work proposed the method where Coulomb
potential of two deuterons is shielded by the bound bipolar
electrons having the total zero spin and twice the charge /3/.
The PdD-crystal goes to the superconducting state at the temperature
of 11 K. That is indicative of the possibility of a
considerable reorganization of the electron shell structure
in the process of hydrogenation. The shielding like that should be especially considerable for superconductors and within the
lower temperature range.

M.Rabinovich in his work notes the connection between superconductivity
and "cold fusion" too /4/. He affirms that the
low - temperature superconductivity can be the proper condition
for resonant overcoming of Coulomb barrier.

In the article by J.Waber he proposed to use superconducting
materials too but their property caused by the third type of
boson state, i.e. the deuteron superfluidity caused by their
position in Boson-Bloch-Condensate, was considered to be the
main cause responsible for overcoming of Coulomb barrier in
the NRCMs. The deuteron superfluidity is supposed to exist at
300 K too /5/. 

At present the available experimental results on the supercon-
ducting materials and law temperatures haven't detected any 
particular advantages of these materials as for the nuclear 
reaction efficiency /6, 7/. 

E.Ragland in his work affirms that as a result of the a parti-
cular deuteron structure and its high mobility in the lattices 
of some metals it is possible to overcome Coulomb harrier at 
their high concentrations and low energies /8/. The periodic 
elements from titanium to nickel, from zirconium to palladium 
and from hafnium to platinum can be these metals. On the whole, 
many experimental results verify this hypothesis. 

G.V.Fedorovich showed that the deuterons energy could be con-
centrated in so-called E-elements of the crystal lattice and 
it could achieve the level enough for the nuclear reaction 
proceeding. That is verified for piezo- and ferroelectric mate-
rials when their temperature changes in the proximity of Curie 
point /9/. 

In spite of the great scepticism concerning the high results 
on tritium generation, which were obtained by some groups, 
this problem is becoming the leading one for under-standing 
the NRCM mechanism because the most reliable results on neut- 
ron, (- and X-radiation, charged particle, 3He and 4He, measu-
rement element transmutation and heat excess don't exceed the 
background noise level very much. For some methods of tritium 
generation on gas discharge base one has obtained the reliable 
results exceeding the background noise level by 2-5 orders of 
magnitude /10, 11/, that allows to start studying the effect 
of different parameters of the deuteron and target atom inter-
action process on the NRCM efficiency. We've already proposed 
the model of two nuclei interaction in close proximity to the 
excited atom of the condensed medium matrix /11/. 

This work seeks to consider the conclusions of the proposed 
model, which show up the matrix material importance for the 
NRCMs at low energies. 


2. MODEL CONCEPT 

In the above-mentioned model we supposed that the nuclei col-
lisions correlated with those of the atoms and at low energies 
the nuclear reactions most probably took place when most of the 
bombarding particle energy was spent on the elastic atom col-
lision,but it wasn't dissipated by the electron system /11/. 

In view of the matrix material effect the range of the optimal 
energies E l  for the deuteron ions is from 30 eV up to 5 keV. 

In view of the energies from E 0  up to E 2 this range is 
within 20-3.10 4 eV. The further discussion of the NRCM pos-
sibility concerns this energy range. 

We think that the shielding of Coulomb potential of two nuclei 
will be more efficient of their collision takes place in close 
proximity to the excited (at least one) matrix atom. In this 
case it is possible to shield-Coulomb potential not only by 
valence electrons, but also. by those ones which are cloSer 
to the matrix atom nucleus. That can take place at the moment 
when the atom shifts from its equilibrium position and a num-
ber of electrons leave the stationary orbits. The electrons 
and ions move in condensed media rather fast and the energy 
relaxation time for the electrons is ...■ 10-13 s and that one 
for the ions ~10-14 s. At the same time the nuclear reaction 
rate is much higher (  10-16 
 - 10-19 s), i.e. while the deu- 
teron and matrix atom collisions caused, for example, by the 
ion bombardment take place, the collisions resulting in such 
a Coulomb potential shielding, that some nuclear reactions can 
proceed, are possible to take place in this mixture. The simi-
lar collisions take place when the accelerated ions having the 
energy exceeding the target matrix atom shift threshold bombard 
the target which consists of the atoms of the matrix having 
some atoms dissolved in it before or introduced in it during 
the ion bombardment by the atoms which can undergo the nuclear 
reactions with each other or with the matrix atoms. The simplest 
variants of such collisions take place according to the follow-
ing type: D  --a—matrix atom or matrix atom.--D—•—D 
(fig. 1). The probability of such collisions increases when 
increasing the reacting nuclei concentration in the matrix 
volume and when increasing the bombarding ion flux. 

The conclusions concerning the choice of the target matrix 
materials and the elements undergoing the nuclear reactions 
are a matter of interest. Firstly, one should choose the ligh-
test elements, such as hydrogen, lithium, beryllium, having 
the minimum Coulomb barrier when closing in, as the elements 
which can undergo the nuclear reactions most readily. Secondly, 
the heaviest atoms from oeriods 71 and VII in Mendeleev's 
periodic table are the best matrix elements which can release 
the greatest number of electrons into the area of shielding 
Coulomb potential of the reacting nuclei when they are excited. 

In this case one should highlight the elements from the lant-
hanide and actinoid groups, having not only the maximum number 
of electron shells, but also the maximum hydrogen solubility. 

One should note that the heavy elements practically don't 
undergo the nuclear reactions at the above-mentioned'energies 
and they are unconsumed catalysts for the lighter elements 
undergoing the nuclear reactions. 

The supposed comparative efficiency of the elements from Men-
deleev's periodic table, taken as a matrix material playing 
the part of catalyst for the reactions proceeding on the deu-
terium nuclei in view of the solubility is shown in fig. 2. 

Fig. I. The diagram of possible triple collisions of the 
light and heavy atoms when bombarding the targets 
by accelerated particles 
The arrows (see fig. 2) show the directions of the nuclear 
reaction efficiency growth when using different elements as 
a matrix material. One can see that the most efficient cata-
lysts of the nuclear reactions can be the elements from the 
actinoid group, which have both the maximum hydrogen solubi-
lity and the maximum number of electrons which can take part 
in Coulomb potential shielding. 

Fig. 2. The proposed methods of the efficiency increase when 
using the elements from Mendeleev's periodic table 
as the target components for catalyzing the NRCMa on 
the deuterium nuclei 
One should note that within the proposed model the target has 
the optimal catalyst atom-to-reacting nuclei atom ratio which 
can be both calculated and experimentally measured. This ratio 
unit obligatory to agree with the maximum possible concentra-
tions of the reacting nuclei in the target matrix, but it can 
be one of the criteria of the proposed model realibility. 

Fig. 3. The dependence of the electron number which can 
leave their orbits on the atomic number of the 
target elements for different ionization energies 
I - total number of electrons. 

No doubt, hydrogen is the best light element for the nuclear 
reactions because of the lowest Coulomb potential arising bet-
ween its nuclei when they collide, but when considering the 
possibility of the nuclear reaction proceeding at low energies, 
one should take into account some additional limitations as 
compared with the high-energy range. If one supposes that the 
neutron-to-tritium generation rate ratio experimentally obtained 
for the
. NRCMs at a level of 10-7-10-9 is attributed to the 
behaviour of the model of Oppengheimer-Phillips type /12/, it 
becomes clear that deuterium is practically the only isotope 
applicable to the nuclear reactions at low energies. It is 
caused by the fact that the reactions with a proton addition 
are forbidden (ths probability concerning the channel with a 
neutron addition is 
10-7- 10-9 ). Therefore, the direct new 
element generation providing any proton addition to the nucleus 
in these reactions at the above-mentioned energies is impos-
sible. 

By way of exception, the NRCM can go when protium takes part 
in it, however, unlike Bush model /13/, it is possible only 
if one finds any materials, besides deuterium, which can 
release neutrons for the NRCMs. It is possible by using the 
low binding energy of the last neutron in beryllium: 
P + 9Be  D + 8Be + 0.6 MeV 
Ns‘, 

The other merit of this reaction is the fact that the toxic 
beryllium converts into the typical helium. 

It is interesting to note that if the electron throw-off from 
the matrix atoms into the light nuclei interacting area is 
considered to be the main cause of Coulomb potential shiel-
ding, the maximum energy which. the bombarding ion requires for 
throuing off all the electrons (up to L-shell, except for 
K-shell) is about e

It is seen in Table 1 that the difference between the total 
ionization energies and El  is getting more considerable for 
the heavy elements (lanthanides and heavier ones) with their 
atomic number growth. This fact can be taken into account to 
revise by experiment the shielding effect on the possibility 
of Coulomb barrier overcoming. 

L-shell ioniza-
tion energy, 
eV 
Table 1 
Comparison of ionization energies and maximum nuclear losses 
for different target materials during deuterium ion bombard- 
ment 
Target material 
Energy 
eV 
Magnesium 
Titanium 
Vanadium 
Yttrium 
Zirconium 
Niobium 
Lanthanum 
Erbium 
Thorium 
Due to the periodic law in the structure of the electron shells 
of an atom, at the same energy the number of electrons which 
are thrown off when these interact with the other atoms and, 
therefore, the shielding efficiency, aren't a simple function 
of the atomic number (fig. 3). Verification of the nonmonoto-
nicity of the NRCM efficiency function for different target 
materials at the same energy also given an opportunity to 
revise the shielding significance in the nuclear reaction 
mechanism at low energies. 


3. DISCUSSION 

According to the tritium generation efficiency results which 
we obtained before the series in increasing order can be writ-
ten as follows: molybdenum, tantalum, hafnium, tangsten, nio- 
bium. The highest position of niobium in this series is natural 
because of its rather high hydrogen solubility and the consider- 
able tungsten efficiency is caused by its high atomic number. 

To our mind, the lower values of the NRCM efficiency for 
tantalum and hafnium are caused by the fact that it is neces-
sary to revise the discharge parameters for these materials, 
in the first place, the temperature and energy level. 

In work /14/ one gives the series of materials arranged ac-
cording to the neutron generation efficiency increase, which 
partly agrees with our results, i.e. iron, molybdenum, copper, 
silver, palladium, tungsten, niobium, platinum. These results 
were obtained at energies about 20 keV in the glow discharge 
and are reliable. On the whole, this series agrees with our 
model, except molybdenum which should be placed before copper 
and palladium which should be placed before niobium. 

The estimation of the yttrium transmutation rate /11/ which 
proved to be lower by six orders of magnitude than the rate 
of D-D reaction with tritium generation, which was going at 
the same time, verifies the fact that if the nuclear reactions 
between the hydrogen and matrix atoms go, the NRCM rate for 
the elements having a high atomic number product will be lower 
than that one for the elements having a lower product. 


4. CONCLUSIONS 

4.1. On the basis of the proposed model it has been shown that :
the most efficient materials for the NRCMs are the targets 
consisting of the heaviest atoms mainly playing the part of 
catalysts and the lightest elements mainly undergoing the 
nuclear reactions when the targets are bombarded by accelerated 
particles. 

4.2. The metals from the lanthanide and actinoid groups have :
been proposed as heavy target elements which are the most ef-
ficient NRCM catalysts. 

4.3. The particular significance of deuterium and beryllium :
for the NRCM proceeding at low energies has been noted. 


REFERENCES 

1. H.Hora, J.C.Kelly, J.U.Patel et al. Screening in Cold Fusion 
Derived from D-D Reactions. - Physics Letters A, 1993, 
v. 175, n. 2, p. 138-143. 
2. Yu.N.Bazhutov, G.M.Vereshkov. The Model of Cold Nuclear 
Fusion by Ersions Catalysis. Cold Nuclear Fusion. The As-- 
 sembly of Science Proceedings. Kaliningrad. M.r.: TsNIImash, 
1992, p. 22-28. 

3. A.S.Davydov. The Possible Explanation of Cold Nuclear Fusion. 

- Ukrainslly Fizicheskiy Zhurnal, 1989, v. 34, No 9, p. 1295-

1297 (in Russian). 

4. M.Rabinovitz. Modern Physics Letters, 1990, v. 4, No. 4, 

p. 233-247. 

5. J.T.Waber. Solid State Boson Condensation Model of Cold 

Fusion. - Frontiers of Cold Fusion. Proceedings of the Third 
International Conference on Cold Fusion. October 21-25, 1992, 
Nagoya, Japan. Ed. by H.Ikegami. Universal Academy Press 
Inc., Tokyo, Japan, p. 627-632. 

6. K.Watanabe, Y.Fukai, N.Niimura et al. A Search for Fracture-

Induced Nuclear Fusion in Some Deuterium-Loaded Materials. -
Ibidem // p. 473-476. 

7. M.Fujii, M.Chiba, K.Fukushima et al. Measurement of Neutrons 

in Electrolysis at Low Temperature Range. - Ibidem //.. 
p. 481-484. 

8. E.Ragland. A Physical Description of Cold Fusion. - Ibidem // 

p. 49-658. 

9. G.V.Fedorovich. Physics Letters A, 1992, v. 164, No. 2, p. 12 
10. T.N.Claytor, D.G.Tuggle and S.F.Taylor. Evolution on Tritiui 
from Deuterided Palladium Subject to High Electrical Cur-
rents. - Frontiers of Cold Fusion. Proceedings of the Third 
International Conference on Cold Fusion. October 21-25, 
1992, Nagoya, Japan. Ed. by H.Ikegami. Universal Academy 
Press Inc., Tokyo, Japan, p. 217-229. 

11. V.Romodanov, V.Savin, Ya. Skuratnik and Yu.Timofeev. Nuclear 

Fusion in Condensed Matter. - Ibidem //. p. 307-319. 

12. I.R.Oppengheimer, M.Phillips. Note on the Transmutation 

Function for Deuterons. - Phys. Rev., 1935, v. 48, p. 500. 

13. R.T.Bush. A Light Water Excess Heat Reaction Suggests that 

"Cold Fusion" may be "Alcaly-Hydrogen Fusion". - Fusion 
Technology, 1992, v. 22, p. 301-306. 

14. S.Sihai, L.Heqing, L.Hongquan et al. Anomalous Effects in 

Deuterium/Metal Systems. - Frontiers of Cold Fusion. Proce-
edings of the Third International Conference on Cold Fusion
October 21-25, 1992, Nagoya, Japan. Ed. by H.Ikegami. 

Universal Academy Press Inc., Tokyo, Japan, p. 447-454. 
