1. EXCESS TRITIUM  

November, 1989 ERAB made five recommendations. “Investigations designed to 
check the reported observations of excess tritium in electrolytic cells are desirable.” was 
one of them [1]. It was important, because the existence of tritium product should be a 
critical evidence to confirm the nuclear reactions in the electrolytic cells [2]. On the other 
The original publication is available at www.springerlink.com  
 Li, X.Z., et al., A Chinese View on Summary of Condensed Matter Nuclear Science. J. Fusion Energy, 
hand, the quantity of the tritium was incommensurate with the neutron emission. It 
should be a hint that the origin of this tritium should be different from the usual d+d 
fusion reaction. Particularly, there was not any report on 14 MeV neutron emission. It 
should be another hint that this tritium should not be the product of d+d fusion reaction. 

F. Will conducted a series of carefully designed experiments which showed that 
excess tritium in electrolytic cells and gas-discharge tube were real and reproducible [3]. 
In parallel with his gas discharge experiments, T. Claytor of Los Alamos National Lab. 
showed also that the excess tritium in gas-loading systems was real as well [4]. This 
tritium measurement was confirmed by the mass spectroscopy in 2001[5]. Indeed tritium 
appeared in various experiments in Japan, Italy, Russia, US, Canada, India and China. It 
is one of the strongest evidences for condensed matter nuclear science in the past 15 
years. It implied a new mechanism at low energy for nuclear reaction. 


2. SELECTIVE RESONANT TUNNELING MODEL 

Selective resonant tunneling model has been proposed to provide the mechanism for 
this low energy nuclear reaction in the condensed matter. Before we hop into the issue of 
tritium production, we may introduce the basic concept of the selective resonant 
tunneling model first. 

Selectivity of the resonant tunneling can be learnt from the electronic harmonic 
circuit. A harmonic circuit is able to pick up the specific wave frequency from the air. 
When the signal is weak, it requires low resistance of circuit in order to observe this 
resonance before its damping off. Similar situation is expected in resonant tunneling of 
the Coulomb barrier. At the low energy, the Coulomb barrier is thick and high; hence, 
the incident deuteron wave in the nuclear well is very weak due to the Coulomb barrier. 
The amplitude of weak penetrating wave may be enhanced by the resonance effect when 
the phase of the reflected wave inside the nuclear well is same as that of the incident 
wave. This is the resonant tunneling. This resonant tunneling requires a weak damping 
in order to observe this resonance before its damping off also. The damping in resonant 
tunneling of the Coulomb barrier is just the fusion reaction itself, because the deuteron 
wave function disappears due to the fusion reaction. Thus, this fusion reaction rate 
cannot be very fast, otherwise the fast damping will kill the resonant effect. On contrary, 
this fusion reaction rate cannot be very small, because zero reaction rate would not give 
any fusion reaction even if the incident deuteron wave function has a large amplitude 
inside the nuclear well due to the resonance. As a result, the life-time of the deuteron 
wave function cannot be too large or too small. There is an optimized life-time, τlife , to 
match a specific Coulomb barrier [6]: τlife ≈ θ⏐ τflight          

Here, θ is a very large number for a thick and high Coulomb barrier. (θ is in the order of 
1022 ~1031 or greater here. 1/θ 2 is just the famous Gamow penetration factor); τflight is the flight-time inside the nuclear well for the penetrating deuteron. τflight  is of the order 
of 10-23 seconds. 

Now we may understand why there is no neutron emission from the resonant 
tunneling at low energy, because the life-time for a neutron emission process is too short 
to meet the matching condition (1). (Usually, the life-time for a neutron emission 
process is of the order of 10-23 seconds due to the nature of the “Strong Nuclear 
Interaction” between nucleons.)  Electromagnetic interaction is much weaker than the 
strong nuclear interaction (the life-time for a gamma-ray emission process here is of the 
order of 10-17 seconds), but it is still too strong to meet the matching condition (1)[7,8]. 
Only the weak interactions (β-decay or K-capture) might possibly provide the life-time 
to meet this matching condition (1) (Fig.1). 

Fig.1 Schematics showing the selectivity of resonant tunneling model 

Consequently, this selective resonant tunneling answers three famous questions 
proposed by J. R. Huizenga in 1992 [9]: the resonant tunneling provides the mechanism 
to penetrate the Coulomb barrier; and the selectivity of the resonant tunneling at low 
energy explains why there is no neutron or gamma radiations after the resonant 
tunneling at low energy. It is clear now that neutron detection is not a good choice to 
search for this low energy resonance. The Nobel prize winner, Professor B.D. Josephson 
of Cambridge University, cited twice our work on “selective resonant tunneling model” 
in his recent talk at Lindau Meeting [10] in order to reply to the “pathological 
disbeliever”. 

It is interesting to find that this selective resonant tunneling is supported by the hot 
fusion data as well [11]. Indeed this selective resonant tunneling model corrected a 
mistake in the d+t fusion cross section data provided by National Nuclear Data Center 
(Brookhaven) in 1996 [12]. Recently this model has been successfully extended to the 
calculation of the hot fusion cross-section for d+d, and d+ 3He [13]. This encouraged us to 
apply this model to study the puzzle of tritium production. 


3. THE WEAK INTERACTION FOR TRITIUM PRODUCTION  

If the weak interaction is the only possible reaction for the resonant tunneling at low 
energy; then, we may immediately write down two reactions for tritium production in 
D(H)/Pd systems, i.e. 

Usually, the positron-decay is faster than the K-capture process for a parent nucleus; 
however, in case of the resonant tunneling, this positron-decay (2) is too fast to meet the 
matching condition (1). Only the K-capture process (3) would possibly match the 
selective resonant condition (1). This inference has been consistent with the experiments. 
The annihilation of positron would produce the 0.511 MeV gamma radiation. However, 
we did not observe any commensurate gamma radiation in all these tritium production 
experiments. Indeed the light water was detected in all Bockris experiments which 
produced tritium [14], and T. Claytor reported that slight tritium production was observed 
in his control run with hydrogen as well [15]. It simply meant that proton was in favor of 
tritium production. The hydrophilic nature of the heavy water might explain the 
contamination by the light water in the electrolytic cells. Moreover, triton in reaction (3) 
obtains the recoil energy only, which is in the order of keV; hence, there was no 14 MeV 
neutrons observed in any of these tritium production experiments. 

It is interesting to notice that H. A. Bethe, the Nobel prize winner, used weak 
interaction and resonant tunneling to obtain the right answer for the p+p fusion cross 
section in the sun [16] as well. 


4. THE ROLE OF THE CONDENSED MATTER: ION BAND 

The condensed matter is important for this resonant tunneling to be in effect. At low 
energy, the long life-time state in the resonant tunneling corresponds to a very narrow 
energy level. It cannot be realized through the beam-target experiment using accelerator 
because of the dispersiveness of the beam energy. Even if in a solid, the confined 
deuteron state is oscillatory in energy due to the thermal oscillation of the crystal lattice. 
In a cycle of oscillation, only in an extreme small portion of oscillation, a deuteron 
might be in a resonant tunneling state. We need an energy band [17] for the deuterons (or 
protons) in a lattice and let a number of deuterons to fill in this energy band. Whenever 
this energy band is overlapped with this resonant tunneling state, one of these deuterons 
in the energy band is always in the resonant tunneling state. Condensed matter provides 
the necessary periodicity to form this energy band. Certain metals (Pd, Ni, Ti, etc.) are 
particularly good because of their nature in absorbing hydrogen, which means an almost 
full occupation of this energy band. In the first five years of the cold fusion research, a 
lot of efforts were devoted to load deuterium gas into the palladium in order to solve the 
problem of reproducibility.  


5. REPRODUCIBILITY AND THE DEUTERIUM FLUX 

Gradually, it was realized later in a variety of the experiments that deuterium flux 
played an important role in repeating the experiment [18] [19] [20]. The concept of energy 
band for deuterons simply means that the deuterons inside a crystal might be described 
by a single wave function. This concept has further led to an anomalous deuterium flux 
on the crystal surface. The reflected waves from the different surface layers of the 
crystal might interfere destructively with each other, and the total reflection might be 
greatly reduced. The result is the enhancement of deuteron density in the surface layers, 
because the penetration on the surface is greatly enhanced due to the reduction of the 
reflection. This inference has been supported by the experimental results that most of the 
nuclear reactions appear in the surface layers [19]. Moreover, multiple layer coating has 
been applied to further enhance this effect; since then, the reproducibility is improved in 
various laboratories. We no longer pursue the high loading ratio inside the bulk of the 
palladium, instead, we attempt to increase the local deuteron density in the surface thin 
layer in terms of high deuterium flux. The key issue is the rapid change of the gradient 
of deuteron density which maintains a steady state of self-sustaining resonant tunneling 
reaction region. Fig.2 shows that a heat flow of 2 mW was maintained in 2500 seconds 
while a deuterium flux was permeating through the thin wall of a palladium tube. The 
right hand side of Fig.2 shows the schematics of the apparatus. Deuterium gas was fed 
into a thin palladium tube which was installed in the center of a reaction chamber. When 
the temperature of the Pd tube and the reaction chamber increased, there was a 
deuterium flux permeating through the thin Pd wall. The deuterium flux was pumped out 
through a coaxial stainless steel tube. The reaction chamber sat in a high-precision 
calorimeter (Setaram C-80D) to monitor the heater flow. A heat flow was observed when 
the whole system was cooling down slowly from 150oC to 140oC (left-lower plot of 
figure 2). The left-upper plot of figure 2 shows the heat flow (dot-dash-dot line) in 
parallel with the deuterium flux (solid line). This deuterium flux increased first before it 
decreased with temperature. This is very different from the feature of a normal diffusion 
flux which is supposed to decrease monotonically with the decreasing temperature. We 
may call it anomalous deuterium flux which was correlated with a heat flow. It is 
reproducible. 


6. SUGGESTION FOR FURTHER EXPERIMENTS 

The heat carried by the anomalous flux is more than 120 eV per deuteron which is 
more than any conceivable chemical heat. Hence, it is desirable to conduct the mass 
spectroscopy analysis for the permeating gas. Particularly, if tritium is observed in the 
permeating gas when a mixture of H2 and D2 gas are used to feed the Pd tube. It would 
justify not only the nuclear nature of the heat flow, but also the “selective resonant 
tunneling theory”. The early Bockris’ electrolytic cell [14] and Claytor’s hydrogen cycle 
[15] might be two precedent experimental results that support this proposal. The 
preliminary experiments at Energy Conversion Research Laboratory (HEAT project 
proposed by Dr. Glenn Schmidt at New Mexico Tech.) and at Institute of Plasma Physics 
(Hefei) were encouraging[21]. 


8. CONCLUDING REMARK 

(1) Resonance plays key role in the Condensed Matter Nuclear Science. Indeed, there is 
not any violation of the law of the physics.
(2) It is not easy to keep this resonance in a steady state. 
(3) We are supposed to look for the mechanism which may keep this resonant state in a 
self-sustaining way. Possibly, a deuterium flux permeating through Pd film is a method 
to maintain this resonance. 
(4) Fission was discovered in 1939, the first fission reactor was in operation in 1942 
with the support from the whole nation. “Cold fusion” was announced in 1989, but we 
are still in the stage of confirmation of this phenomenon because of the lack of financial 
support. 

Fig.2 A heat flow correlated with an anomalous deuterium flux permeating 
through the thin wall of a Pd tube cooling down to certain temperature 
interval. 


REFERENCES 

Excess Tritium 
[1] Energy Research Advisory Board, Cold Fusion Research, DOE/S-0073, 1989. 
[2] N.J.C. Packham, K.L. Wolf, J.C. Wass, R.C. Kainthla, and J. O’M. Bockris, 
“Production of Tritium from D2O Electrolysis at a Palladium Cathode,” J. 
Electroanal. Chem., 270 415(1989). 
[3] F. G. Will, K. Cedzynska, D.C. Linton, “Reproducible Tritium Generation in 
Electrolychemical Cells Employing Palladium Cathodes with High Deuterium 
Loading,” J. Electroanal. Chem., 360 161 (1993). 
[4] T. N. Claytor, et al., “Tritium Production from Palladium Alloys,” Proceedings of 
ICCF-7, Vancouver, Canada, ENECO, Inc., Salt Lake City, USA (1998) p.88. 
[5] B.W. Clarke , B.M. Oliver, M.C.H. Mckubre, F.L. Tanzella, P. Tripodi, “Search for 
3He, 4He in Arata-Style Palladium Cathodes II: Evidence for Tritium Production,” 
Fusion Science and Technology, 40 152 (2001). 
Selective Resonant Tunneling model 
[6] X.Z. Li, C.X. Li, and H.F. Huang, “Maximum Value of the Resonant Tunneling 
Current through the Coulomb Barrier,” Fusion Technology 36 324 (1999). 
[7] X. Z. Li, J. Tian, and M. Y. Mei "Fusion Energy without Strong Nuclear Radiation," 
Journal of Fusion Energy, 18, 51 (1999). 
[8] X. Z. Li, et al., "Study Of Nuclear Physics For Nuclear Fusion," Journal of Fusion 
Energy, 19, 163 (2002). 
Three Miracles 
[9] J. R. Huizenga, “Cold Fusion: The Scientific Fiasco of the Century,” University of 
Rochester Press, p.111-113 (1992). 
[10] B. D. Josephson, “Pathological Disbelief”, Lecture given at the Nobel Laureates’ 
Meeting, Lindau, June 30th., 2004, Edited version of presentation (revised Aug. 20th., 
2004, http://www.newenergytimes.com/library/2004JosephsonB-LindauLecture.pdf ) 
Selective Resonant Tunneling model and Hot Fusion 
[11] X.Z. Li, J. Tian, M.Y. Mei, and C.X. Li, “Sub-barrier Fusion and Selective 
Resonant Tunneling,” Phys. Rev. C, 61 024610 (2000). 
[12] X.Z. Li, “Nuclear Physics for Nuclear Fusion,” Fusion Science and Technology, 41 
63 (2002).  
[13] X.Z. Li, B. Liu, S. Chen, Q. M. Wei, H. Hora, “Fusion cross sections for inertial 
fusion energy,” Laser and Particle Beams, 22 (2004), 469. 
Hydrogen in experiments producing tritium 
[14] K. L. Wolf, “Wolf: My Tritium was an Impurity,” Science, 248 1301 (1990). 
[15] T. N. Claytor, et al., “Tritium Production from Palladium Alloys,” Proceedings of 
ICCF-7, Vancouver, Canada, ENECO, Inc., Salt Lake City, US (1998) p.88. 
Resonant Tunneling and Weak Interaction in the Sun 
[16] H.A. Bethe, C. L. Chritchfield, “The Formation of Deuterons by Proton 
Combination,” Phys. Rev. 54 246 (1938). 
Ion Band in Crystal 
[17] T.A. Chubb and S.R. Chubb, “Cold Fusion as an Interaction between Ion Band 
States,” Fusion Technology, 20 93 (1991). 
Deuterium Flux and Reproducibility 
[18] M.C.H. Mckubre, S. Crouch-baker, A.K. Hauser,S.I. Smedley, F.L. Tanzella, M.S. 
Williams, S.S. Wing, “Concerning Reproducibility of Excess Heat Production,” 
Proceedings of ICCF-5, Monte-Carlo, Monaco (1995) p.17. 
[19] Y. Iwamura, M. Sakano, and T. Itoh, “Elemental Analysis of Pd Complexes: Effects 
of D2 Gas Permeation,” Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 41 4642 (2002). 
[20] X.Z. Li, B. Liu, J. Tian, Q.M. Wei, R. Zhou, and Z.W. Yu, “Correlation between 
Abnormal Deuterium Flux and Heat Flow in a D/Pd System,” J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 
36 3095 (2003). 
[21] Q. M. Wei, B. Liu, Y. X. Mo, X. Z. Li, S. X. Zheng, D. X. Cao, X. M. Wang, and J. 
Tian, “Deuterium (Hydrogen) Flux Permeating through Palladium and Condensed 
Matter Nuclear Science”, The Proceedings of 12-th International Conference on 
Condensed Matter Nuclear Science, Marseilles, France, Oct.31-Nov.5, 2004. edited 
by Jean-Paul Biberian.(to be published) 
