1. Introduction

The intensive study followed during last years on NRS indicates that the achievement of
these phenomena is usually associated to certain experimental conditions. This conditions can be
summarized as follows: firstly, the employment of a metal matrix with suitable chemical and
physical properties[!] secondly, the achievement of a high deuterium loading in the matrix[2] and
finally the imposition of non-equilibrium perturbations in the deuterium-metal system[3].

Considering the three main conditions mentioned above, we present in this paper a
complete set of NRS experiments that were performed using an iodide-titanium sample as the
initial metal matrix. This sample was produced in our lab by a modified technique of the iodide
process[4] which has as its main goal the possibility of preparing very pure titanium metal.
Afterwards the iodide-titanium film is highly deuterated from the gas phase and is subjected to a
wide test of different non-equilibrium conditions in order to trigger deuterium fusion reactions in
the Ti-D system. A more detailed report has been submitted for publication elsewhere.


2. Methods

2.1 Experimental procedures:
An iodide-titanium sample of 55mg mass was deposited uniformly over an electrically
selfueated tungsten filament ( dimensions 40x2x0.025 mm
3
) that was supported in the middle of a
glass reaction chamber by two thick tungsten electrodes. The typical composition of the sample
was checked for a twin sample by EDX and AES analyses. The content of gaseous impurities is as
follows: C<l.5at%, N<2at% and O=2at%, while no metallic impurities where detected in the outer
part of the film at a typical detection sensitivity of 0.2at%. It should be remarked that there is
some diffusion of the tungsten substrate into the titanium film which reaches at most half of the
deposited film[5]. Same analyses were carried out in a commercial sample of 99.6% nominal 
purity yielding a content of gaseous impurities ten times higher than that of our film. It is well
known that the presence of gaseous interstitial impurities in titanium reduces its maximum
deuterium uptake, since these impurities also occupy similar sites in the metal matrix. Therefore, a
higher deuterium loading of the metal can be performed in iodide-titanium samples in comparison
with that of the commercial ones that are commonly used in NRS experiments.

The titanium film was deuterated in the same chamber that was used for its deposition, so
it is never exposed to air in order to avoid any superficial oxidation effects. The experimental
system for the deuteration of the sample and the performance of NRS experiments is shown in
Fig. I. It essentially comprises of two different equipments: one dealing with the thermodynamical
and electrical control of the iodide-titanium film (upper part of the figure) and the other with the
neutron detection system (lower). Both parts are time interconnected and the first one will be now
described to explain how the deuterium loading of the metal and the performance of NRS
experiments were accomplished.

The iodide-titanium sample is supported by two tungsten electrodes that allow passing an
electric current through the film which is generated by a de power supply (Kenwood PD35-20D)
and is controlled by a function synthesizer (Keithley 3910). In addition, two thin tungsten wires
are connected to the edges of the sample, so that the well known four probe method can be used
for resistance measurements. A thermocouple (NiCr-NiAl) is located in the outer part of the
reaction chamber to get an idea about gas temperature at the environment of the sample and for
safety precautions. The reaction chamber, which is kept in vacuum after the titanium deposition, is
made of glass and is connected through a very thin glass separator to a deuteration reservoir. The 

Figure 1: Sketch of the experimental system used for the sample deuteration and the performance of NRS 
experiments. 

whole set constitutes a Sieverts type apparatus composed of two volumes: the reservoir chamber 
(V=77.5±1.5ml) and the reaction chamber (V=374±10ml). The reservoir chamber is attached to a 
deuterium inlet (purity 99.999%) and also to a turbomolecular pump, and is equipped with a 
piezoresistive transducer (Kistler 4043A) and a penning gauge. All thermodynamic and electrical 
parameters are monitored by a PC with an acquisition time of 10 seconds. 

To perform the titanium film deuteration, the reservoir chamber is first evacuated down to 
10-5torr and then deuterium gas is admitted into this chamber after crashing the glass separator 
with a magnetic striker. Afterwards, the deuterium pressure is fixed to 300mbar and connections 
to vacuum and deuterium inlets are closed so that both chambers form a closed system. Under 
these circumstances the sample is heated up to glowing temperature (1200K) by passing a high de 
current (13A) through it. Finally, a decreasing electric ramp is programmed through the sample to 
cool it slowly down to room temperature, leading to the deuterium absorption into the film as 
dictated by the characteristics of the P-X-T phase diagram of Ti-O[6]. The deuterium 
concentration in the pure titanium film after this treatment was evaluated, from the overall 
pressure drop in the system to be in the high concentrated 8-phase (x atomic ratio D/Ti::::::1.6). 

Once a high deuterium concentration is achieved in the sample, it is necessary to provoke 
non equilibrium conditions in the system for triggering the NRS phenomena. To this aim, we 
performed two different sets of experiments. In the first set, we applied different electric fields in 
the sample by passing different electric current patterns through it. The second set of experiments 
deals with the possible influence of phase transitions on the achievement ofNRS. 

The imposition of electric fields in a solid deuteride system induces important 
perturbations such as the presence of electromigration processes[?] and Ampere forces[8] in the 
system. Considering this scope, there were three experiments performed -denoted as Exp 1, Exp2, 
and Exp3- corresponding to different electric current patterns, as show in Fig.2. In Exp 1 two 
constant electric currents of :::lA and :::4A were passed through the sample. In Exp2, the electric 
current was changed abruptly between 0.2A and 3A at a frequency of 0.8mHz. Finally, in Exp3, a 
triangular current pattern between 0A to 7 A at a frequency of 0.4mHz was programmed. 

Figure 2: Time-evolution of the electric current patterns imposed through the sample in Exp!, Exp2 and Exp3. 

In relation with phase transition experiments, there are some publications that report the 
detection of NRS in titanium deuteride when this system is thermally cycled around room 
temperature[9, 1 OJ-which can be related to the 8-E phase transition- or around the P-8 phase 
transition itselfl 11, 12]. To check these triggering conditions we performed two experiments, Exp4 
and Exp5, in which the sample was forced to undergo the above mentioned transitions. In order to 
provoke the 8-E phase transition (Exp4) the reaction chamber was surrounded by a liquid nitrogen 
dewar, meanwhile triangular electric current cycles up to 9.5A were passed through the sample. 
This procedure induces thermal cycling of the sample from nearly liquid nitrogen temperature to 
some value above room temperature, as checked by sample resistivity measurements. Twelve of 
these cycles were programmed at a frequency of 0.4mHz. Finally, the P-8 transition was 
provoked in Exp5 by cycling a high electric current pattern between 6A and 13A through the 
sample with an initial deuterium pressure of 300mbar in the closed reactor. Sixteen triangular­
shaped cycles were conducted at a frequency of 0.8 mHz and sixteen more at a double speed. To 
verify the accomplishment of this transition both electric resistance of the sample and deuterium 
pressure in the closed reactor were monitored simultaneously, reflecting without doubt the 
mentioned transition as is discussed in another publication[ 13]. 

2.2 Neutron count analysis :
Neutron detection measurements were carried out, while doing all the described 
experiments, by two liquid scintillation counters (NE213, from Nuclear Enterprise and BC501, 
from Bicron Corporation). The y-n discrimination of the scintillation counters was accomplished 
by two electronic systems using a pulse shape discrimination technique. Both energy spectra and 
counting time-evolution are finally recorded in different Multichannel Analyzers. In the case of 
the counting time-evolution, the detected neutrons (namely counts) are collected up every 20 
seconds, while in the energy spectra the counts are integrated during the duration time of every 
experiment (typically 9 hours). The absolute efficiency of the detectors, taking also into account 
the geometrical configuration of the set-up, are 6.6x10·
4 for NE213 and 5.7xl0"3 for BC501 at the
interesting energy of 2.45MeV corresponding to the D+D➔3He+n reaction. The background
counting rate the detection systems are 5.3xl 0"3c/s and 0.26c/s, respectively. Further information
about calibration of the equipment and other technical characteristics can be found elsewhere[14]. 

In order to examine the possible existence of the NRS phenomena in the described 
experiments it is indispensable to compare the neutron measurements that are monitored during 
the experiments with those corresponding to the natural background. To this end, we recorded the 
background signals for eleven days after the completion of the NRS experiments. Due to the fact 
that the time pattern of the emitted neutrons is unknown in advance ( e.g. bursts or time-continuous 
emissions), it is convenient to analyze the neutron counting rate for different integration times. 

Selected integration times (ti) for these analyses are 20s, corresponding to the minimum 
acquisition time in the experiments; 1200s, corresponding to the typical time of electric current 
cycling frequency and 9h, corresponding to the typical elapsed time of the experiments. 

The frequency distribution of neutron counts must obey a Poisson distribution if they are 
originated by random phenomena, as is essentially expected for the natural background. This 
behaviour is shown in Fig.3a, where the absolute frequency distribution of the natural background 
at ti = 20s for the BC50 I is compared to the Poisson distribution that corresponds to the average 
value of the neutron counts (A) during ti. To discern neutron emissions during the experiments 
from the Poisson background it should be establish a confidence level that dictates the neutron 
detection limit of the system. Taking 99.9% as the confidence level, the detection limit for BC501 

Figure 3: Absolute frequency of the neutron background detected by the BC501 system and statistical 
approximations at integration times of 20s (a) and I 200s (b). In both graphics the significant region corresponding 
to a confidence level ?.99. 9% is expressly pointed out. 

is 15 counts at ti = 20s, corresponding to a neutron emission rate of 85 n/s. This detection limit 
implies that if 15 or more counts per 20s are detected by the BC501 system, they can be 
considered as NRS significant signals at a 99.9% of confidence level. 

A similar analysis has been performed for the other ti values. At ti = 1200s the Poisson 
distribution approaches to Gaussian, as the value of A considerably increases (Fig.3b). The 
confidence level of 99.9% corresponds now to a deviation value of 3.29cr from A, the detection 
limit in the BC501 is 377 counts per 1200s and the neutron emission rate is 9n/s. Finally, at ti=9h 
the registered background time is insufficient to get good approximations to a statistical function. 
Nevertheless, it can be considered that we are still dealing with a Gaussian distribution and to take 
the deviation value of the neutron counting for significant signals as 3.29cr. However, the 
Tchebychev theorem states that the confidence level for this assumption is only of 90%. The 
minimum neutron emission that can be detected in the BC501 is in this case of 3n/s. This 
detection limit implies, considering the sample titanium mass (55 mg) and its deuterium content 
(X=l.5) a neutron detection rate limit of A=3xl0-21f/pds. In Table I, the neutron detection limits
for both detection systems at the different integration times are summarized. 

Table I: Neutron detection limits in the NE2 I 3 and BC501 systems at different integration times (tJ. The detection 
limit is given as neutrons per second emitted.from the sample and counts per ( detected by the equipment. 


3. Results and Discussion

The neutron measurements were analyzed for every integration time and compared with 
the neutron background. It should be remarked that the electronic system associated with the 
NE213 detector suffered a misfunction during Exp4, so that no neutron data will be offered for 
this detector in Exp4. All other neutron data are now presented and discussed. 

The highest values of counting rate registered at ti=20s for every experiment are 
summarized in Table II. For this value of ti, the significant events respond to a counting rate equal 
or higher than 3 counts in NE213 and 15 in BC501. The most anomalous result has been found in 
Exp 1, in which 3 counts were detected once in NE213 and 16 counts were detected twice in 
BC501. Nevertheless, the absolute frequency of these events for the background Poisson 
distribution is still important: 0.76 for NE213 and 0.37 for BC501. Besides, there is no time 
correlation between the significant signals in both detectors. Therefore, in spite of the detection of 
these anomalous events, we can not assert the presence of the NRS phenomena at short integration 
times (ti=20s) with a detection limit of ::::::l00n/s. 

Table If: Significant events monitored by the neutron detection systems at t;=20s. k-F(k) indicates the highest 
counting value in the experiments and its absolute frequency (in parenthesis). F(k) background stands for the 
absolute frequency in the background of the monitored significant events in experiments. The absolute frequency is 
only given in significant events. 

The significant events at ti= 1200s -corresponding to the typical cycling time- are those 
with a counting rate equal or higher than 15 counts in NE213 and 3 77 counts in BC501. While no 
significant events have been detected in NE213, some significant ones were observed in BC501. 
The most anomalous outstanding events present a deviation from the background average of 5.0cr 
(Exp3) and 4.3cr (Exp5). It should be noticed that both experiments were done with similar 
electric current patterns: triangular-shaped waves reaching high electric current values. The 
neutron counting in BC501 and the electric current time evolution for both experiments are shown 
in Fig.4. It can be observed that the significant events were detected in both cases after the 
imposition of many electric current cycles and also that the detected counts in every interval have 
often a higher value than the background average level. All these observations could indicate a 
slight neutron emission from the titanium deuteride film, however other facts contradict this 
possibility. Firstly, as was previously pointed out, no significant events were detected by NE213, 
being the detection limit for both scintillation counters practically the same: 11 n/s in NE213 and 
9n/s in BC501. Secondly, there was found no correlation in every experiment itself between the 
significant events and similar electrodynamic states, as is denoted in Fig.8 by the vertical lines. In other words, while imposing the same electrical conditions to the sample not always significant 
events were detected. From this point of view, the significant events detected by BC501 could 
possibly be related to a shift in the natural background or to a small drift in the electronic system 
associated with this detector. In conclusion, it is not possible to claim for sure the presence of 
NRS phenomena in the conducted experiments with a time pattern similar to the electric current 
cycling frequencies. Nevertheless, future experiments would be desirable to be done for checking 

Figure 4. Counting time evolution detected by the BC501 system at t;=l200s in Exp3(a) and Exp5 (b). The electric 
current time-evolution in these experiments is also depicted. The horizontal dotted lines indicate the average 
counting value of the background (A). The horizontal continuous lines stand for a deviation value of+ 3. 29a from 11.. 

The different counting rate between two events monitored at identical electrodynamical conditions is indicated by 
vertical continuos lines 
if long electric cycling at high currents could induce the presence of NRS phenomena in titanium 
deuteride. 

Finally, the whole neutron counting for every experiment was analyzed and the results are 
presented in Fig.5. The results match well with the background measurements, except in the case 
of the detected counts by BCSOl in Exp3, where a deviation of 3.6cr from the background average 
was monitored. In any case this possible neutron emission was not corroborated by NE213. It 
should also be realized that the collected counts are in most of the cases higher than the 
background average recorded after completion of the NRS experiments, indicating a possible shift 
of the registered background level. To conclude, there was no detection of any continuous NRS 
phenomena in these experiments at a detection limit of 2n/s, corresponding to a fusion nuclear 
reaction rate in the sample of A=3xl o-21f/pds.

Figure 5: Neutrons detected 
by the NE2 l 3 system (a) 
and BC501 system (b) 
during the whole elapsed 
time of every experiment. 

The experimental data is 
represented by cross 
symbols, the background 
signal average (A) by 
circular symbols and the 
deviation of ±3. 29a form 11, 
by error bars. 


4. Conclusions

There has been a complete set of NRS experiments performed after deuteration of a high 
pure iodide-titanium film. This sample has been subjected to different electric fields and has been 
forced to undergo the &-E and �-& phase transitions in order to trigger deuterium fusion reactions 
in the Ti-D system. Neutron measurements monitored during these experiments have been 
analyzed considering distinct time patterns and have been compared with the natural background. 

No clear evidence of the presence ofNRS phenomena during experiments have been found, being 
the upper limit for the rate of the D+D➔3He+n reaction of A=3xl f
f21f/pds. Nevertheless, some 
anomalous events were monitored in one of the neutron detectors when multiple electric current 
cycles up to high values were performed in the samples, which makes desirable a further 
investigation on this aspect. 


References 

D. Gozzi, P.L. Cignini, R. Caputo, M. Tomellini, G. Balducci, G. Gigli, E. Cisbani, S.
Frullani, F. Garibaldi, M. Jodice and G.M. Urciuoli, in Frontiers of Cold Fusion, p. 155, H.
Ikegami Ed., Universal Academy Press, Tokyo, 1993.
M.C.H. Mckubre, S. Crouch-Baker, A.M. Riley, S.I. Smedley and F.L. Tanzella, in Frontiers
of Cold Fusion, p. 5, H. Ikegami Ed., Universal Academy Press, Tokyo, 1993.
A. Legget and G. Baym, Phys. Rev. Lett. 63 (1989) 191.
R.F. Rolsten "Iodide Metals and Metal Iodides", Wiley, New York, 1961.
F. Cuevas, Doctoral Thesis, Universidad Aut6noma de Madrid, 1996. In Spanish.
A. San Martin and F.D. Manchester, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagram, 8 (1987) 30.
K.G. Rajan, U.K. Mudali, R.K. Dayal and P. Rodriguez, Fusion Technol., 20 (1991) 100.
8 M. Rambaut, Phys. Lett., A, 163 (1992) 335
A. de Ninno, A. Frattolillo, G. Lollobattista, L. Martinis, M.Martone, L. Mori, S. Podda and
F. Scaramuzzi, Europhysics Letters, 9 (1989) 221.
10. H.O. Menlove, M.A. Paciotli, T.N. Claytor, H.R. Maltrod, O.M. Rivera, D.G. Tuggle and S.
E. Jones, in Anomalous Nuclear Effects in Deuterium-Solid Systems, p. 287, A.LP. Conf. 
Proc. 228, New York (1991).
11. V.F. Zelenskij, V.F. Rybalko, A.N. Mozorov, G.D. Tolstolutskaya, V.G. Kulish, S.V. Pistyak
and I.S. Martynov, Preprint KNFTI, TsNIIatominform, Moscow, (1989) p.61.
12. LL. Beltyukov, N.B. Bondarenko, A.A. Janelizde, M. Gapanov, K.G. Gribanov, S.
Kondratov, G. Maltsev, P. Novikov, S. Tsvetkov and V. Zakharov, Fusion Technol., 20
(1991) 234-238.
13. F. Cuevas, J.F. Fernandez and C. Sanchez, to be published in J. Alloys and Compounds.
14. J.F. Fernandez, F. Cuevas, M. Alguer6 and C. Sanchez, to be published in Fusion Technol.
JCCF-6 October JJ-18, 1996 Japan / 
