Introduction

In our previous work [1,2] we have presented the results of observation and investigation of
interaction of unknown magneto-charged particles (hypothetical magnetic monopoles) with
surface of MDS (Al-SiO2-Si) structure. We have observed the traces of ordered thermomechanical impact on the surfaces (Fig. 1). The length of trace was L  2 mm. These results
were observed during experiments in Kiev Electrodynamics Laboratory “Proton-21” on
achieving the superdense state of matter by using the high-current electron driver [3]. In the
experimental setup an impulse electron flux with a total energy about 100...200 J and duration
50 ns was used as a coherent driver in every cycle of supercompression. The energy of each
electron in different experiments is about 300...400 kV, the total current - 50...70 kA . Figure 1. The general view and details of MDS-structure with the tracks

It was shown that the source of a great specific energy release, dQtot/dl  -106 GeV/cm, spent
on the formation of these traces, may be the processes of nuclear synthesis reactions
Al27+C12 = K39, Al27+C13 = K40, which are running with the participation of MDS-structure
surface nuclei and are stimulated by the action of magnetic monopoles [1,2].

In the present work the parameters of these monopoles and the mechanisms of their creation in
Earth laboratory are discussed and calculated.


1. Parameters of magneto-charged particle

In our previous work [1,2] it was shown that the process of formation of periodic tracks is
connected with a magnetic interaction of magneto-charged particle with both magnetic field of
anode current and multilayer MDS structure, which is the combination of diamagnetics (Si, SiO
and melted ionized Al) and paramagnetic (solid Al) layers. In view of the form of a macrotrack
(involving the great number of strictly periodic oscillations [1,2]), we may conclude that the
controlling magnetic field is approximately the same along the entire trajectory. This
corresponds to the fact that formation duration of mentioned track part is significantly less than
the total duration 50 ns of the current pulse. If this duration was comparable with , then the
period of oscillations at the beginning and at the end of the track would be essentially different.

This result allows us to assume that the duration of the formation of this part of the track with
the length , and the mean longitudinal velocity of motion of the
hypothetical magneto-charged particle <vg> is greater than 4.107
cm/s. The maximal longitudinal velocity (in view of periodical stopping and periodical stimulation
of fusion reactions along the trace [1,2]) is vg 108
cm/s

During detailed SIMS-researches it was shown that the area of unknown particle "point of
reflection" (Fig. 2) is the foreign small-size (about 10 microns) object made of Fe56, Fe57 and
Co59 isotopes and situated on the MDS structure. Figure 2. General view and the details of unknown particle reflection area on MDS surface. 

This object is made of iron-cobalt alloy and it is probably multi-domain magnetic material
with the typical internal magnetic field H0 6...8 kOe . The typical size of domain wall is about
 microns. The same size has the area of magnetic field outside
the magnetic material. If the magnetic charge of the particle equals g e  (137...68) than the
magnitude of magnetic potential barrier in the area of «point of reflection» equals (see Fig. 3) Figure 3. The scheme of reflection of magnetic charge from magnetic domain
From these results the upper estimation of unknown magneto-charged particle mass can be
made: The upper limit of magnetic monopole mass is less than Mg=10-23 gram, that is by 1016 times
less than previous well known cosmological estimations (10-7 gram) based on the grand unified
theory! So with a high probability the unknown particle is a light magnetic monopole that was
introduced by George Lochak [4], and that is the magneto-excited neutrino.

There are two possible ways for generation (creation) of such particles during the experiments
in “Proton-21” Lab:
1. These monopoles were created during nuclear processes of protonization and neutronization
in collapse zone with the presence of very strong squeezed nonuniform magnetic field in the
experimental setup of "Proton21" Lab. Fundamental nuclear transformation in this setup
during the formation (shock implosion) and explosion of this zone is described in [3, 5-7]. A
specific mechanism of the generation of magnetic charge can be related with the topological
features of the collapse zone.
2. Generation of these monopoles took place during the break of stable monopole-antimonopole
pair of cosmological origin in very strong squeezed magnetic field.

Let us consider the parameters of such processes.
Parameters of such pair can be calculated with the use of conservation law for its total energy
In this case the minimal meansquare size of monopole-antimonopole pair and maximal
meansquare impulse of relative motion are following
From (5) it follows that rmin  10-12 cm (if monopole mass Mg equals proton mass
mp =1.6.10-24 g) and rmin  10-9 cm if monopole mass equals electron mass.
The potential energy of monopole-antimonopole pair with the size of rmin is
The maximal kinetic energy for relativistic and nonrelativistic motion of monopole and
antimonopole inside the pair is described by the equations
Here / 2 g g  M is the reduced mass of monopole. From last two equations it follows that the
motion of monopole (antimonopole) inside the pair is nonrelativistic:
From formulas (7-9) it also follows that the ratio of kinetic and potential energies in each pair
is very small both in nonrelativistic and relativistic cases
This result proves that monopole-antimonopole pair is very stable neutral system.
The total mass of such system in stable bound state is very small.
In fact such pair is an invisible electro- and magneto- uncharged and extremely light object. It
is possible that such objects have existed (unnoticed) in the universe from the moment of the Big
Bang


2. Break of monopole-antimonopol pair in a strong magnetic field

In Fig. 4 the structure of the potential hole of monopole-antimonopole bounded pair in the
cases of presence and absence of external locally homogeneous magnetic field H0 is presented. Figure 4. The structure of the potential hole of bounded monopole-antimonopole pair in the cases of presence
and absence of external magnetic field.

The resulting expression for the probability of such tunneling effect is the following
Here mp
- proton mass.
For light Lochak's monopole with Mg=mp and H0 1015 Oe we have H 10230 years.
For light monopole with Mg=me and H0  1010 Oe, H 0.1 s.
For very light "Lochak's" monopole with Mgс
2
1 keV at H0 107 Oe,  s. Formation
of such (and much more strong) magnetic field takes place in "Proton21" Lab experimental setup
during fast pinch-effect of hard-current electron beam [3].


References

1. Adamenko S.V., Vysotskii V.I.// 12th CMNS Proceedings, Japan, p. 356-366.
2. Adamenko S.V., Vysotskii V.I.// Surface, #3 (2006), p. 84-92.
3. Controlled Nucleosynthesis. Breakthroughs in Experiment and Theory, (Editors:
S.V.Adamenko, F.Selleri, A.van der Merwe), Series: Fundamental theories in Physics, v.156,
Springer, 2007, 773 p.
4. Lochak G. Z.Naturforsch., v.62b (2007) p.231-246.
5. Adamenko S.V., Vysotskii V.I. Foundations of Physics Letters, v. 17, No. 3 (2004), p. 203-
233.
6. Adamenko S.V., Vysotskii V.I. Foundations of Physics, v. 34, No. 11 (2004), p. 1801-1831.
7. Adamenko S.V., Vysotskii V.I. Foundations of Phys. Letters, v.19, No. 1 (2006), p. 21-36.




