1. INTRODUCTION

Following the initial claims of 1989,1,2 the body of research on anomalous eﬀects in metal deuterides has
grown to include thousands of papers on a wide spectrum of topics. DoE, to facilitate their review of this
set of research, has asked for the preparation of the following summary. The entire body of research is
not addressed. Rather, a subset of research from two areas is presented: selected issues associated with
excess heat production in deuterated metals, and a brief discussion of some aspects of nuclear emissions
from deuterated metals.


2. EXCESS HEAT EFFECTS IN FLEISCHMANN-PONS EXPERIMENTS

In the simplest sense, the Fleischmann and Pons experiment is an aqueous electrochemical experiment
in which a palladium cathode is loaded with deuterium in a heavy water electrolyte. If the associated
conditions are suitable, an excess heata eﬀect can be observed (for example, see Figure 1). In 1989, there
developed both interest and concern regarding the measurement of excess energy and the conditions
under which the excess heat eﬀect could be observed. In the years following the initial announcement,
it was easier for most to believe that the eﬀect was due to calorimetric errors than due to new physics.
However, excess heat has been observed with a variety of calorimeters based on varying operating
principles and by diﬀerent groups in diﬀerent labs, all largely with similar results. The hypothesis that
the excess heat eﬀect arises only as a consequence of errors in calorimetry was considered, studied, tested,
and ultimately rejected. A brief discussion of calorimetric issues is provided in Appendix A (see also a
recent more general discussion by Storms3). The conditions under which the excess heat eﬀect occurs
remain of interest. Much has been learned since 1989. We consider brieﬂy in what follows some of the
factors that have been identiﬁed.b

Figure 1.
Excess power in Fleischmann-Pons experiments as a function of time in twin cells and calorimeters, driven with
a common current, one with heavy water and one with light water.

2.1. Total Excess Energy Production:
The total excess energy produced in the Fleischmann-Pons experiment can greatly exceed what might be
expected from chemical eﬀects.1,4 The energy density is customarily quoted relative to the total cathode
volume,c corresponding to the conclusion that the excess heat eﬀect has its origin within the metal
deuteride based on measurements of cathode temperature rise and the establishment of temperature
gradients in electrolytic and gas calorimetric experiments. Gozzi and coworkers reported5 excess energy
production at the level of 130 MJ/cm3. The SRI group quoted a value of 45 MJ/mol for a measurement
in a closed cell ﬂow calorimeter, which is about 450 eV/atom of Pd.6 There are a great many reports of
energy production at this general level, and some at much higher levels as well.

2.2. Excess Heat and Loading:
Early publications by Fleischmann and Pons implied that the phenomenon they were studying was
conditioned. From the material then available, it was not easy to deduce a complete set of necessary and
suﬃcient conditions to initiate the excess heat eﬀect. Little eﬀort was made in early replication attempts
to measure or report the bulk, interfacial and stimulus conditions employed. By the time of the ﬁrst
International Conference (ICCF1 in 1990), an eﬀort was underway to evaluate systematically the various
parameters of the eﬀect. With the development7 and adoption8 of bulk resistivity and other methods9
as in-situ probes of the Pd cathode composition, it was quickly recognized that the Fleischmann and
Pons eﬀect occurred in Pd wire cathodes only when very high average levels of loading (D:Pd atomic
ratio) were achieved in the Pd bulk.d Figure 2 shows the measured correlation between thermal power
production (in excess of known power input) and D:Pd bulk atomic ratio determined in-situ from
the measured cathode resistance. The eﬀect appears to increase approximately parabolically above a
threshold loading of D/Pd ≈ 0.875. A very similar result with a slightly lower threshold was presented
and published simultaneously by Kunimatsu et al.9,10 based on independent experiments carried out at
IMRA Japan (Hokkaido). Such high loading is accompanied by high internal pressure, and it is necessary
for the cathode to be able to withstand this in Fleischmann-Pons experiments.11

Figure 2.
Excess power density in W/cm3 versus average D/Pd atomic ratio measured from the axial resistance for a
Johnson Matthey wire cathode 30 cm long and 1 mm diameter in 1.0 M LiOD containing 200 ppm Al.

This loading requirement in the basic Fleischmann-Pons experiment is thought to be a general pre-
condition for the eﬀect in Pd wire cathodes.e An analysis of 49 calorimetric results obtained at SRI
in 1990 and 1991 showed that in no case was a calorimetric imbalance observed (19 examples) where
an electrode failed for whatever means to achieve a bulk average D/Pd loading of 0.9. However, all
electrodes achieving a loading of 0.95 or greater (15) exhibited a heat excess more than 3 times the
measurement uncertainty (σ), in many cases many tens of σ larger. Example of such heat excess is
shown in Figures 1 and 3. For the cells with cathodes achieving a maximum loading between 0.90 and
0.95, approximately half manifested measurable excess heat and half did not.

The equilibrium spacing of deuterons in PdD is greater than in D2, so the proximity of deuterons at
high loading alone is not expected to promote an excess heat eﬀect. The pair-wise fusion rate of deuterons
in PdD or in other metal deuterides is too small by tens of orders of magnitude to be observable.13 The
notion that deuterons are somehow being squeezed together, so as to fuse at high loading or high fugacity
in these experiments, is not considered a plausible explanation.

Figure 3.
Excess power (Pxs), reference voltage (Vref) and cell electrochemical current (Icell) as a function of time (hours)
for an Englehard Pd wire cathode 3 cm long and 3 mm in diameter in 1.0M LiOD containing 200 ppm Al.

2.3. Surface Chemical Potential:
Fleischmann and Pons recognized the surface chemical potential of deuterium as the variable most
critically associated with the eﬀect they were studying. If the bulk and surface are at equilibrium then
the surface chemical potential can be inferred from a measurement of the bulk loading. The situation
relevant to the Fleischmann-Pons eﬀect, however, often involves inhomogeneous loading and the presence
of important deuterium ﬂuxes. Under these conditions a measure of the average composition reﬂects
only the lower limit of the surface chemical potential for a dynamically loading cathode.

Electrochemists have long used the reference voltage as a means to measure a species’ chemical
potential.14 Basically, the potential diﬀerence is measured between the electrode of interest and another
having deﬁned potential (the reference electrode) either in the presence of a steady current or at open
circuit. Fleischmann and Pons advocated this method as early as 1990.15 Others have made use of this
method as a diagnostic in relation to the excess heat eﬀect.16,17,18,19

Figure 3 plots an early result at SRI where the cell current, reference voltage and excess power
were recorded simultaneously. In this case the reference voltage was measured without interruption of
current, and the presence of a ﬁnite electrolyte resistance between the cathode and reference electrodes
results in voltage oﬀset proportional to current. It is clear, however, that the dynamics of the reference
potential more closely correlate with the excess power than with the cell current. Unfortunately the
electrode surface potential is determined by other species in addition to deuterium. The adsorption of
Li, for example, is strongly reﬂected in the potential plotted in Figure 3, and the maintenance of a high
potential at near zero excess power at the right of this ﬁgure was thought to reﬂect the presence of a
lithium rich, blocking surface ﬁlm deposited on the cathode surface. The latter ambiguity is removed if
the reference potential is measured with current interruption.18

Figure 4.
Excess power as a function of current density for Fleischmann-Pons cells with heavy water and with light water.

2.4. Temperature Dependence:
A strong sensitivity of excess heat production on the operating temperature was noted and exploited
early on by Fleischmann and Pons, who developed an interesting protocol in which the temperature was
allowed to rise following the onset of an excess heat eﬀect.20 The heat was found to increase over the
course of a calibration heat pulse, which is attributed to a thermal positive feedback eﬀect.21,22 Others
have noted such a temperature eﬀect.23 This basic eﬀect was studied by Storms,24 and the results
expressed in a form consistent with
Pexcess = P0 e−Ea/kBT
where Ea is an equivalent activation energy that was found to be about 15 Kcal/mol (about 670 meV).f
The observed small activation energy is thought to be associated with creating the proper chemical
environment and not associated directly with the nuclear process.

2.5. Excess Heat and Current Density:
The identiﬁcation of the D/Pd loading requirements as necessary criteria did not bring an understand-
ing of the Fleischmann and Pons eﬀect.
Moreover, an initiation eﬀect was noted that has nothing
to do with D loading, an explanation for which was proposed only recently. Electrochemical current
density was initially reported by Fleischmann and Pons as having a threshold eﬀect on excess heat pro-
duction that is completely independent of its eﬀect on loading,4 and this was later widely studied and
conﬁrmed.5,6,26,27,28,10,24,29,30,31 Evidence of this current threshold behavior can be seen in Figure 3, and
more directly in Figure 4, which shows calorimetric results from two identical cells, one with D2O and
one with H2O, operated electrically in series, while interrogated with the same measurement system.27
An approximately linear increase in excess power with a threshold of about 265 mA cm−2 can clearly
be seen for the Pd cathode operated in D2O. Data for the H2O cell do not deviate from calorimetric
balance; various excursions reﬂect only transients following changes in input power. In no case was the
Fleischmann and Pons eﬀect observed to occur in cells containing H2O as the major component at SRI,
and excess heat measured in D2O cells was observed to decrease to zero upon substantive addition of
H2O.

Figure 5.
Excess power as a function of time and ﬁtting function for a Johnson Matthey Pd wire cathode 10 cm long and
1 mm diameter in 1.0 M LiOD containing 200 ppm Al.

2.6. Deuterium Flux and Triggering Issues:
The excess heat eﬀect is often observed to be stimulated by changes in the experimental conditions.

Fleischmann and Pons noticed in their initial work that the excess heat eﬀect was occasionally initiated
or improved with the application of a heat pulse, which can be considered as a transient change in
conditions within the present argument. At SRI, one of the techniques used with success to initiate
a heat pulse was to alter the current density, either through sudden changes or through ramps (as in
Figure 5). Takahashi introduced a protocol in which the current density was alternated between low
and high values.32,33 Bockris described a regimen in which the current periodically changed direction.34
Yamaguchi described an experiment involving vigorous outgassing of deuterium from a rapidly heated
metal deuteride sample.35,36,37 The application of an axial current in a wire or cathode can be used to
drive a signiﬁcant deuterium ﬂux against the electronic current.38 This eﬀect was exploited by Celani
and coworkers,39,40 and by Preparata,41 who reported excess heat and other eﬀects with a high axial
current.

Quantitative evidence indicating that deuterium ﬂux plays an important role in determining the
excess heat in a Fleischmann-Pons cell was found at SRI.42 A purely empirical function was found
to describe the excess heat observed for 1 mm diameter Pd cathodes.
This function, and its ﬁt to
experimental data, are shown in Figure 5. After initiation, excess power was found to be proportional
to the product of three terms: (i) the square of the loading above a threshold value (x − x0)2; (ii)
the electrochemical current above a threshold; and (iii) the ﬂux of deuterium through the interface,
irrespective of direction, measured as the time derivative of the average D loading, |δx/δt|.
Incoming deuterium produces a ﬂux that increases the loading, which should improve things accord-
ing to the discussion above. But experiments seem to show that deuterium ﬂux makes a diﬀerence,
independent of whether it is incoming, outgoing, axial, or traversing.43 One question of interest concerns
the functionality of the ﬂux: what is it about the ﬂux that makes a diﬀerence? Another interesting
question, independent of any understanding of the functionality, is whether the eﬀect of deuterium ﬂux
can be augmented or replaced by other kinds of stimulation. This question opens the door to a very much
larger discussion that we are not able to pursue here. The general issue of triggering has been of interest
since the early 1990s,44 and occupied a central place at recent international conferences.43,45,46,47,48,49


3. HELIUM AND EXCESS HEAT

Much eﬀort has been devoted to the search for reaction products that could be associated with the
excess heat. It soon became clear that there are insuﬃcient chemical reaction products to account for
the excess heat by several orders of magnitude. Attention has been directed to the search for nuclear
“ash” in amounts commensurate with the energy measured. The problem is more diﬃcult than in the
case of chemical reactions as no similar processes are known.

Searches for neutrons, tritons, and other energetic emissions in quantitative association with the
excess heat eﬀect have uniformly produced null results.5 The absence of quantitative energetic emissions
leads to the conjecture that the new process is somehow converting nuclear energy directly to heat. There
have been numerous consequences of this within the ﬁeld, one of which is that people have historically
been motivated to maximize the energy produced in excess heat experiments (and not eﬃciency19) in
the hope of maximizing the reaction products, so that they might be identiﬁed. There have been many
assays performed on cathodes before and after excess heat production, seeking the presence of new
elements or isotope shifts.50,51,52 Although there appears to be evidence that supports the existence
of both elemental and isotopic anomalies near the cathode surface in some experiments, it is generally
accepted that these anomalies are not the ash associated with the primary excess heat eﬀect. The main
focus of attention has been on helium as the primary nuclear reaction product.53

3.1. Correlation of Excess Heat and Helium:
Numerous investigators have sought and, in many cases, found 4He in diﬀerent environments including in
the gas phase,54,55,56,57,58,59,60,107 dissolved in the cathode metal,61,62,63,64,65,66 and emitted as charged
particles.67,68 If helium were created in the cathode interior, then one might expect to see helium
dissolved in the metal. If helium were produced near the surface, then perhaps it would show up in
the surrounding gas. The presence of quantitative energetic helium would be expected to produce an
associated Bremsstrahlung x-ray emission. However, there is no evidence for such signals in quantitative
measure with what might be expected for a primary excess heat mechanism.

The ﬁrst and historically most important experiments were performed by Miles et al., to correlate
the helium content of gas produced by electrolysis (D2 or H2, and O2) with the average heat excess
during the interval of sampling. Because of the very low 4He concentration expected and observed (1-
10 ppb) extensive precautions were taken to ensure that samples were not substantially contaminated
from the large ambient background (5.22 ppm).
In an initial series of experiments, later replicated
several times,55,69 eight electrolysis gas samples collected during episodes of excess heat production in
two identical cells showed the presence of 4He whereas six control samples gave no evidence for 4He.

Figure 6.
Excess energy determined by gradient (boxes) and diﬀerential (diamonds) calorimetric methods plotted against
the increase in 4He concentration in a metal-sealed helium leak-tight vessel. The experiment was performed by heating
palladium on carbon hydrogenation catalyst materials to ∼ 190o C in ∼ 3 atmospheres of D2 gas pressure (see Appendix
B).

These results were only semi-quantitative, although the statistical signiﬁcance of these and later results
were profound. Because of questions related to the helium permeability of sample vessels and cells, these
results were taken simply as suggesting a nuclear origin and mechanism for the Fleischmann and Pons
eﬀect.

Later work by Miles and Bush using sealed metal vessels, and by McKubre70 and Gozzi71, conﬁrmed
that 4He is presented to the gas phase above the electrolyte of a cathode demonstrating the Fleischmann
and Pons eﬀect.h Gozzi presented some very striking results,71 in which bursts of excess energy were
time-correlated with bursts of 4He observed in the gas stream.i When compared one at a time, the
number of helium atoms detected per burst was on the order of what might be expected from 23.8 MeV
per D+D reaction, but with a variation between 0.25 and 1.0 of this amount. If the energy production
in these experiments is in fact due to a reaction mechanism consistent with D+D → 4He + 23.8 MeV,
then it seems that some of the helium may enter the gas stream and some remain within the metal.
Several important conclusions can be drawn from the studies cited above:
• The rate of helium production (atoms/s) varies linearly with excess power (see Figure 6).
• The amount of helium observed in the gas stream is generally within a factor of about 2 less than would
be expected for a reaction mechanism consistent with D+D → 4He.
• Helium is partially retained, and dissolved helium is released only slowly to the gas phase for analysis.

Recent work at ENEA Frascati also supports these conclusions.72,73 Excess heat and helium observations
consistent with a D+D → 4He + 23.8 MeV (heat) reaction mechanism, in a metal deuteride near room
temperature, stands in stark contrast to the d(d,γ)4He reaction known from nuclear physics.

Figure 7.
Results for 4He measurements associated with the excess heat results presented in Figure 5, as discussed in the
text. The concentration of helium and gas sampling times are indicated by squares, and the fraction of that expected for
a 23.8 MeV/4He atom by triangles.

3.2. Reaction Q Value:
As the loss of deuterium in association with excess heat is not presently observable, and since there are no
commensurate energetic reaction products, the argument in support of reaction mechanisms consistent
with D+D → 4He is indirect. One can measure energy production, and assay for 4He in the gas stream
or the solid, with uncertainties introduced in the reaction energy Q because all of the helium produced
may not be accounted for in the measurement. Experiments are prefered in which a total inventory of
the helium is made in order to improve the accuracy of the reaction Q value measurement. To this end,
we discuss brieﬂy an experiment in which helium was measured in the gas stream, and an additional
eﬀort was made to drive the helium out of the metal.

The experiment under consideration was performed at SRI, and the excess heat measured is illus-
trated in Figure 5. The experiment was performed in a helium leak-tight, all-metal and metal gasketed
calorimeter. Samples were transferred in metal gas sample ﬂasks to be analyzed for 4He by the U.S.
Bureau of Mines at Amarillo, Texas.70 The initial value of 4He was 0.34 ± 0.007 ppmV/V in the D2 gas
used to charge the cell.

Figure 7 traces the history of the cell, M4, from four helium samples taken after excess power was
observed.
The upper solid line is the expectation for helium concentration presuming: (i) an initial
value of 0.34 ppmV/V, and (ii) that 4He is produced in a reaction which delivers 23.8 MeV of thermal
energy to the calorimeter. The ﬁrst gas sample taken shortly following the second heat burst of Figure 5
yielded a value of 1.556 ± 0.007 ppmV/V 4He, which is about 62% of its expected value, and consistent
with the earlier observations by Miles, Bush and collaborators,55 and also Gozzi and collaborators.71 A
second sample taken about six days after the ﬁrst showed a measurable increase in 4He content instead
of the decrease that would be expected since, to maintain positive cell pressure, the gas taken for the
ﬁrst sample had been replaced with cylinder D2 containing a lower level of 4He (0.34 ppmV/V). These
ﬁndings support earlier observations that helium is released slowly from the palladium after an initial
delay.

After making these measurements, an attempt was made to dislodge near surface 4He either thermally
or by D atom motion by subjecting the cathode to a period of compositional cycling, while still sealed in
the calorimeter. Square and sine wave modulations of varying period and amplitude were imposed on the
DC (negative) potential at the Pd electrode in an attempt to ﬂux deuterium atoms through the interface
and thus act to dislodge near-surface ad- or absorbed 4He atoms. At the end of this period, the potential
was reversed to withdraw all deuterium atoms from the Pd bulk. No excess heat was observed during
the periods of oscillation although calorimetric uncertainties were large due to the strong departures
from the steady state that accompanied the pulsing.

Gas samples were taken before this procedure, again after purging the cell and reﬁlling with D2 from
the gas bottle with 0.34 ppmV 4He, and once more after cycling. The latter sample exhibited the highest
concentration of 4He measured in this cell, speciﬁcally 2.077 ± 0.01 ppmV/V. By making a proper mass
balance of the helium lost through sampling and purging, and that gained through make-up from the
gas bottle, it is possible to assess with deﬁned uncertainty the results of deuterium ﬂuxing in freeing
lightly trapped 4He. The ﬁnal integral mass balance yielded a value of 104 ± 10% of the expected value
if the excess power in Figure 5 is due to a reaction of the sort D+D → 4He + ∼ 23.8 MeV (heat).

This value remains the most accurately determined in this ﬁeld (in the sense that contributions from
both the gas stream and the metal are included), but it suﬀers from the criticisms that the numbers
of samples were few, and the largest value of 4He measured was less than 50% of that in air. We note
that 4He has been produced numerous times in excess heat experiments at levels above that of the
concentration in air. One example is shown in Figure 6. This plot illustrates the real-time correlation
between excess heat and the growth of 4He concentration in a metal-sealed, helium leak-tight vessel.
The Q value of 31 ± 13 and 32 ± 13 MeV per 4He atom measured is also consistent with the reaction
D+D → 4He + ∼ 23.8 MeV (heat). Because of the importance of this result, it is discussed further in
Appendix B.


4. EXCESS HEAT BEYOND THE BASIC FLEISCHMANN-PONS EXPERIMENT

The importance of the basic Fleischmann-Pons experiment, as discussed in the previous section, is
primarily scientiﬁc in the sense that the research provides strong evidence of a new excess heat eﬀect of
nuclear origin. In addition, this basic experiment has provided a focus for a signiﬁcant research eﬀort,
and many important aspects of the experiment have been studied, as discussed above. During the past
15 years, numerous variants of this basic experiment have been proposed and executed. In what follows,
we examine a subset of such studies.

4.1. Self-Sustaining Excess Heat Eﬀect:
Excess heat production in the absence of electrical input was ﬁrst discussed by Fleischmann and Pons
at ICCF4.74,75 It was found that cathodes continued to produce excess heat in some cases after the
termination of the electrochemistry in which heat had been produced earlier during “normal” cell opera-
tion. This eﬀect has been reported in other experiments,76,22,78,79 and is often referred to as “heat after
death.” These observations suggest a possible diﬀerence in the conditions required for the initiation of
an excess heat eﬀect as compared to the conditions required for sustaining the eﬀect.

4.2. Excess Heat in Other Metal Deuterides:
Excess heat in electrochemical experiments involving metal deuterides other than PdD has been reported
in several modiﬁed Fleischmann-Pons experiments. Helium production in association with excess heat
was studied in palladium alloys by Miles.80 Excess heat has been reported in TiD with a D2O-H2SO4
electrolyte using thermal imaging.81 Excess heat and other eﬀects were reported from an electrochemical
cell with a Ti cathode by Bernardini and coworkers.76 Excess heat observations with Pt cathodes were
reported by Dash52 and by Storms.82 Platinum does not form a deuteride, and the excess heat in this
case is attributed to a surface layer.82

4.3. Indirect Gas Loading:
Arata and Zhang introduced an interesting experiment in which palladium black is sealed within the
interior of a palladium cathode, and the resulting composite (hollow) cathodes structure is electrolyzed.83
Deuterium gas within the interior of the cathode is in equilibrium with the deuterium in the highly loaded
cathode, and the palladium black is loaded indirectly. Evidence for excess heat and helium production
has been obtained from this kind of experiment. We discuss this further in Appendix C.


5. NUCLEAR EMISSIONS

The ﬁrst report of emissions consistent with deuteron-deuteron fusion was made by Jones and coworkers
in 1989,2 who claimed that low-level neutrons near 2.45 MeV were emitted from electrochemically-
loaded titanium deuteride.j Since that time, there have been numerous reports of neutron and charged
particle emission generally at low emission rates from metal deuterides, which are consistent with a
deuteron-deuteron fusion reaction mechanism. In what follows, we will discuss some of this work. We
note that there is in addition evidence in support of emissions that are clearly not associated with a
deuteron-deuteron fusion reaction mechanism. A subset of these observations will be discussed below.

5.1. The Jones Experiment:
Much eﬀort has been devoted since 1989 to the Jones eﬀect by Jones and coworkers,84,85 and also by
other groups.32,33,86,87,88,89,90 Most of the eﬀort has focused on neutron measurements, but there have
been observations of charged particles as well.85 Low-level nuclear emissions typically occur in bursts
lasting a few seconds to several days,84 and at lower current density than that discussed above in
connection with the excess heat eﬀect (Jones and coworkers reported neutron emission at 20 mA/cm2).
A distinct burst eﬀect (see Figure 8) was reported by Wolf in neutron emission from PdD electrochemical
experiments.91 This is reminiscent of a similar burst eﬀect noted for the excess heat in the Fleischmann-
Pons experiment. It was noted in the early 1990s that there were considerable similarities between the
electrochemical protocols and palladium cathodes used by Wolf in neutron emission experiments, and
those used at SRI in excess heat experiments. In discussions between the two groups, it became apparent
that the most signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the two experiments was the current density involved. At
SRI, excess heat was observed at elevated current densities, with a current threshold in the range of
200-300 mA/cm2. At Texas A&M, Wolf increased the current to about 30 mA/cm2 to initiate neutron
emission, but found no neutron emission at signiﬁcantly higher current densities.92 The low-high current
protocol of Takahashi discussed above scans through both regimes, and is associated with both excess
heat and neutron emission.28.

5.2. Stimulation of Nuclear Emissions with Electrical Current:
Cecil and coworkers reported charged particle emission in experiments where current was run through
TiDx [using Ti(662) alloy].93 For example, a proton signal centered at 2.45 MeV was presented.k Jones
and coworkers have recently used this same general approach.94,90 The group evacuated a heated cham-
ber containing 25 to 250 µm thick Ti foils, introduced 1 atmosphere of D2 gas and partially loaded
the foils, which were then placed in front of a particle detector, or in a neutron counter. A low back-
ground nuclear detector system was used. Electrical current was run through the foils during nuclear
counting. Background subtracted counts were observed for neutrons at typical rates of 40 counts per
hour. Background subtracted counts were observed for charged particles identiﬁed as < 3 MeV protons
at typical rates of 100 counts per hour (and up to 2000 counts per hour), with emission rates varying
strongly over the course of a few hour burst event. Results from a particularly strong burst are shown in
Figure 9. The signal is centered at 2.4 MeV and the particle identity is determined from a comparison
with a similar spectrum obtained with a thin Al absorber foil.94 Background subtracted coincidences
between two particles, consistent with protons and tritium from deuteron-deuteron fusion, occur at a
rate of 1 count per hour in foils with no electrical current running. In this case, there is an additional
experimental procedure of LiOD and D2SO4 surface treatment and rinsing prior to nuclear counting. In
all cases in the recent Jones experiments, excess nuclear counts diminish with time, positive signals are
observed greater than 50% of the time, and no excess nuclear counts are observed when H2 is substituted
for D2.

Figure 8.
Neutron burst from PdD loaded electrolytically from the experiments of Wolf and coworkers.

5.3. Neutrons from Ti Shards in Deuterium Gas:
Neutron emission consistent with d(d,n)3He reactions were reported in 1989 from gas-loaded metal
deuteride shards with thermal cycling.95 In these experiments the metal is loaded at high pressure
and cycled between liquid nitrogen temperature and room temperature.
Neutron emissions appear
occasionally in burst epsisodes.96,97,98,99,100 High eﬃciency neutron detectors were employed,98 and
some of the measurements were performed under conditions where the background was quite low.101,96
Research along these lines has not continued in recent years. The evidence in support of neutron emission
from this kind of experiment is strong, but in such experiments the conditions are not well controlled.
This, combined with a low associated emission frequency, made other approaches seem more attractive.96

Figure 9.
Proton spectrum near 2.4 MeV from TiDx taken over 21 minutes using a double scintillation detector, as
presented by Jones at ICCF10. The two diﬀerent signals are from two diﬀerent scintillators (plastic and glass). The light
output scale is related to the proton energy.

5.4. Relation between Neutron Emission and Excess Heat Eﬀect:
We note that the amount of energy associated with these low-level emissions is not observable calorimet-
rically. Whether there is a correlation between nuclear emission eﬀects and excess heat or not has been
under discussion since 1989.103 There have been several observations of excess heat with simultaneous
diagnostics for neutron emission, and for x-ray and gamma emission.5,104,71 An anticorrelation between
excess heat and neutrons was reported by Okamoto and coworkers.105 We have noted that excess heat
production in the Fleischmann-Pons experiment has an associated current threshold around 200-300
mA/cm2, while neutron emission is associated with lower current densities (around 30 mA/cm2 in the
experiments of Wolf, Jones, and coworkers cited above), suggesting that the diﬀerent eﬀects have diﬀer-
ent operating regimes. In experiments that operate with both high and low current densities, there are
reports of both neutron emission and excess heat production.106,107 There is a study with the low-high
current protocol in which a correlation is reported where cathodes producing the largest excess heat
eﬀect also show the largest neutron emission.108

5.5. Nuclear Emissions not Attributable to Deuteron-Deuteron Fusion:
There are several reports for weak nuclear emissions which clearly are not associated with a deuteron-
deuteron fusion mechanism. In 1990, Cecil and coworkers noted the presence of very energetic charged
particles from thin TiD foils up to and beyond 10 MeV93 (see also the PhD thesis of Liu109). Energetic
alphas around 15 MeV have been observed by Lipson and coworkers from PdD.110 Both alphas and
protons near 14 MeV have been seen in experiments with TiD.111 The appearance of such signals under
conditions that are similar to those associated with excess heat production and low-level deuteron-
deuteron fusion is signiﬁcant, and provides additional information that may be helpful in understanding
the underlying physical processes responsible for the new eﬀects.

5.6. Broad Proton and Alpha Spectrum from Deuterons on TiDx:
Kasagi and coworkers have reported anomalous results from beam experiments using TiDx targets in
which product nuclei are observed with a very large energy spread.112 This group bombarded TiDx
(x>1.2) foils with 90-150 keV deuterons and observed protons with energies from 6-17 MeV and alphas
with energies from 4.5-6.5 MeV at scattering angles between 135 and 155 degrees at a rate of 10−6 of
the deuteron-deuteron fusion rate. An aluminium absorber foil in front of the particle detector stopped
the elastically scattered beam. The energy spectra for the protons and alphas are consistent with a
three-body reaction mechanism
d + d + d →4 He + p + n
Q = 21.62MeV (3 body)
Hubler and coworkers at the Naval Research Laboratory have partially conﬁrmed the existence of this
anomaly in that the protons have been observed in some, but not all, of the samples bombarded. A
coincidence experiment between the proton and alpha would be required to conﬁrm this reaction. The
experiment is important, and thought by some to be related to other experiments that show anomalies
in metal deuterides. It could be interpreted as a probe of the probability that two deuterons are close
together in the solid when the bombarding deuteron encounters them. There is no viable conventional
explanation for the existence of this nuclear signal.


6. CONCLUSIONS

The research discussed in this paper provides evidence for eﬀects in three categories:
(1) The existence of a physical eﬀect that produces heat in metal deuterides. The heat is measured
in quantities greatly exceeding all known chemical processes and the results are many times in
excess of determined errors using several kinds of apparatus. In addition, the observations have
been reproduced, can be reproduced at will when the proper conditions are obtained, and show
the same patterns of behavior. Furthermore, many of the reasons for failure to reproduce the
heat eﬀect have been discovered.
(2) The production of 4He as an ash associated with this excess heat, in amounts commensurate
with a reaction mechanism consistent with D + D → 4He + 23.8 MeV (heat).
(3) A physical eﬀect that results in the emission of: (a) energetic particles consistent with d(d,n)3He
and d(d,p)t fusion reactions, and (b) energetic alphas and protons with energies in excess of 10
MeV, and other emissions not consistent with deuteron-deuteron reactions.

Experimental results for tritium production were noted, and anomalous results from deuteron beam
experiments on TiDx were discussed brieﬂy. In each case, the eﬀects cannot be accounted for by known
nuclear or solid state physics. The underlying processes that produce these results are not manifestly
evident from experiment. The scientiﬁc questions posed by these experiments are, in the opinion of the
authors, both worthy and capable of resolution by a dedicated program of scientiﬁc research.


APPENDIX A: CALORIMETRIC ISSUES

As enumerated by Storms,30 four questions must be addressed when evaluating the state of heat obser-
vations:
(1) Was the calorimetric technique used by Fleischmann and Pons suﬃciently stable and accurate to see the
claimed extra energy?
(2) Have others independently replicated the claims using stable and accurate calorimeters?
(3) Can prosaic sources of chemical energy or energy storage eﬀects be ruled out?
(4) Have reasons for success or failure been discovered?

A clear, positive answer to the ﬁrst question was available in massive detail114 but only retrospectively.
Fleischmann and Pons used an open cell from which energy was lost in a variety of ways, including
by infrared radiation, and as chemical energy carried with the evolving gases. The resulting diﬀerential
equation was awkward and subject to misunderstanding. Fleischmann addressed the mathematical issues
to the point where the isoperibolic method used can be seen to have accuracy better than 1% (Fleis-
chmann’s estimate is 0.1%). With daily automatic calibration, the Fleischmann and Pons calorimetric
method was able to establish and assure stability for the length of time (months) needed to perform
their experiments.

Because the cell was open to escaping gases, attention was also given to the possibility that an un-
known and variable fraction of the evolving D2 and O2 gas may recombine to D2O within the calorimetric
envelope. A reduction of this subtractive term would give rise to the appearance of “excess heat” when
in reality it simply had a chemical origin. Quantiﬁcation of the upper bound of this eﬀect was made by
Fleischmann and Pons,115 by Jones et al.116 and in ﬁnal detail by Will.117 With 15 years of hindsight,
it is now clear that the initial heat claims of Fleischmann and Pons must be taken at face value as
quantitatively sound and capable of standing alone. Fortunately, this last is not necessary. Hundreds,
possibly thousands, of attempts were made to replicate the Fleischmann and Pons eﬀect. Apart from
those conducted in 1989, when little was understood about necessary conditions, most researchers who
attempted to reproduce the eﬀect claimed success. We do not attempt to evaluate the bulk of these
experiments or claims, although readers are invited to do so and could beneﬁt in this regard by starting
with the reviews by Storms.113

To address the second question above, we provide an example. Flow calorimetry with closed cells was
selected at SRI at the outset in part to avoid ongoing criticisms of the Fleischmann and Pons (Fick’s law)
method. Electrochemical cells were operated thermodynamically closed, sealed, and immersed in the
ﬂuid ﬂow. Rather than measuring heat ﬂow as a temperature diﬀerence across a deﬁned (and presumed
stable) barrier, the emerging heat in the SRI experiments was measured as the temperature rise in
a moving liquid mass that surrounded the cell. In this way, the governing equations become trivial:
all considerations of heat source dependence and so-called “recombination” eﬀects can be avoided in
simple ﬁrst principles operation. Where potential sources of error were anticipated or recognized, the
calorimetric system was designed to yield conservative estimates. Over 50,000 hours of calorimetry to
investigate the Fleischmann and Pons eﬀect have been performed to date at SRI, most of it in calorimeters
identical or very similar to that shown in Figure 10.

The object in Figure 10 is immersed in a constant temperature bath (typically held constant and
uniform to within 3 mK long term and short term). The bath is situated in a constant temperature
room (±1K). Calorimetric ﬂuid is drawn from the environing bath, past two inlet temperature sensors
(100 Ω platinum resistance temperature sensor RTD’s) through the ﬂow labyrinth and past the cell under
interrogation, which is encased in a brass ﬁn structure for better and more uniform communication of
heat. The ﬂuid ﬂow is then drawn upwards and constrained by the hemispherical top to ﬂow through a
small hole and labyrinth, past and closely proximate to two outlet RTD’s. Additional sensors of other
types have been used to further assure accurate values of the measured temperature rise. The ﬂuid is
then drawn through a heat exchanger to the inlet of a constant volume displacement pump, and then
delivered directly to an electronic balance. The balance is polled by computer to determine the ﬂuid
mass ﬂow rate as ∆M/∆t. In high power experiments requiring higher ﬂuid ﬂow rates, rotameter ﬂow
sensors were used in series with the mass ﬂow measurement.

Figure 10.
SRI mass ﬂow calorimeter.

Calorimetry at SRI normally employed an electrical Joule heater either inside the cell or wound tightly
on the cell circumference, constrained by the radial brass heat ﬁns. This heater is used to calibrate the
thermal eﬃciency of the convective heat ﬂow process, and to allow for constant power operation in the
presence of a variable electrochemical heat input. The equation of the calorimeter is thus:
In most experiments and all discussed here, the ﬂuid was air-saturated H2O for which the heat capac-
ity, Cp, is well known. Current, voltage, and temperature sensors, and measurement instrumentation
including the mass balance, were calibrated independently of the calorimeter. The only term requiring
in-situ calibration is the conductive loss term k, which is the coeﬃcient sum of all heat that leaves the
calorimeter by means (primarily conductive) other than with the ﬂuid ﬂow. This term is small. By
careful insulation, controlled geometry and selection of the ﬂuid ﬂow rate, k was typically less than 1%
of Cp(∆M/∆t). Since k is deﬁned by geometry, it is also very unlikely to change and was observed to
be stable.

Using these precautions the calorimetric method developed at SRI was shown by calculation and
experiment27 to have an absolute accuracy between ±0.35% and 0.5% depending on input conditions.
It is worth noting that this accuracy is actually worse than that calculated by Fleischmann114 for the
Fleischmann and Pons isoperibolic method when fully implemented. It is important to further note that
the calorimetric methods are very diﬀerent, the absolute accuracies comparable, and the results obtained
consistent.

Several results have already been presented (Figures 1-5) to give a sense of the calorimeter signal-to-
error ratio in heat-producing experiments. Below we summarize the ﬁndings and results from the major
SRI eﬀort to conﬁrm (or refute) the existence of the Fleischmann and Pons eﬀect.
(1) Sustained excess heat eﬀects were observed from Pd electrodes undergoing electrolysis on more than 50
occasions with conﬁdence more than three times the measurement uncertainty (3σ).
(2) Bursts or episodes of excess heat generation lasted from periods of several hours to more than a week.
(3) During a burst, the excess power was typically between 3 and 30% of the total electrical input power,
with the largest sustained observation being in excess of 340%.
(4) The intensity of this eﬀect was in the range 3-300 W/cm3.
(5) Sustained heat bursts exhibit an integrated energy at least ten times greater than the sum of all con-
ceivable chemical reactions within the closed cell.
(6) When normalized to the number of cathode Pd (or D) atoms, the energy yield is of order 100-1000
eV/atom, with the largest observed yield 2076 eV/Pd atom.
(7) Endothermic eﬀects were not observed. Calorimeters maintained a tight thermal balance at times when
excess power was not being observed.
During these intervals, calibration checks could be performed
conveniently and reliably by adjusting the level of the complementary Joule heater to increase and
decrease the system total input and output power. Except for the expected transient responses, the
calorimeters were never observed to exhibit output heat power lower than input.
(8) Excess heat eﬀects were observed to occur with D2O but not H2O electrolytes, under similar or more
extreme conditions of loading, input power and current density.
(9) After an appreciable initiation or incubation time, heat generation appeared to be correlated to three
variables: D/Pd loading above a threshold; electrochemical current stimulus above a threshold; and
deuterium ﬂux or other dynamic stimulus.

With these results of a clear enthalpic excess unaccountable by known chemical or physico-chemical
means, it was determined at SRI and elsewhere to undertake a thorough and systematic evaluation of
possible nuclear processes, by careful screening of potential products.l At SRI alone, serious eﬀorts were
made to interrogate active electrochemical and gas loading cells118 for neutrons, x-rays, γ-rays, charged
particles, beta and other charge emission, tritium, 3He and 4He. In over a decade of eﬀort, evidence
for all of these potential products was observed, except neutrons. Of the products observed, only 3H,
3He, and 4He could in any way be correlated, quantitatively or temporally, with the enthalpy production
rates.


APPENDIX B: RESULTS FOR THE CASE EXPERIMENT AT SRI

In 1998, Case reported results from an experimental technique that oﬀered potential advantages over
electrochemical Fleischmann and Pons experiments.54 He exposed commercial supported platinum group
metal (PGM) hydrogenation catalyst materials to hydrogen or deuterium gas at slightly elevated pressure
(1-3 atm) and temperature (150-300oC) in sealed metal vessels.

In some cases, temperature sensed in a thermowell situated in the catalyst bed was higher by an
amount sometimes exceeding 10oC under two diﬀerent conditions: during heat bursts in D2; and in D2
relative to H2 at the same pressure. The diﬀerence in thermal conductivity between the gaseous isotopes
does not appear to contribute appreciably to the observed temperature diﬀerence. The primary heat
loss pathway does not signiﬁcantly involve gas phase conduction. Furthermore, a temperature diﬀerence
for the same heater power is observed only in unusual circumstances. Having surveyed a very extensive
range of supported PGM catalysts, Case concluded that the eﬀect:
(1) Could be observed with carbon supported catalysts but not with non-conductive supports
(2) Was exhibited with all PGM’s (Pd, Pt, Ir and Rh) except Ru, which had not been well studied at the
time of publication
(3) Occurred optimally in a narrow range of catalyst loading (0.5 – 1%); at higher and lower loading the
magnitude of the eﬀect diminished and disappeared
(4) Occurs in a narrow range of temperature, about 130-300oC, with activity peaking at ∼ 250oC
(5) Was destroyed irreversibly when the catalyst was heated to temperatures much greater than 300oC
Case concluded that his results represented evidence of a nuclear process because the energy production
estimated from his calorimetry was much greater than could be accounted for from chemical processes.
In addition, one post-test gas sample was reported to contain approximately 100 ppmV/V of 4He in a
1 atm sample of D2.

The elements of simplicity, small materials inventory, rapid initiation, clear thermal signature and
possible quantitative nuclear signature inspired many to attempt replication of what became known as
the Case eﬀect. Some succeeded in repeating the isotopic temperature disparity, although it quickly
became clear that the experiment was far more demanding than it ﬁrst seemed.m

An eﬀort was made at SRI to reproduce the Case experiment. Initial attempts to reproduce the
eﬀect with catalyst materials supplied by Case and in metal sealed vessels somewhat smaller than those
employed by Case failed to observe systematic temperature diﬀerences between H2 and D2. Samples
of gas withdrawn from H2 and D2 cells did not show an increase in 4He when submitted to an on-line,
high-resolution and high-sensitivity Extrel C-50 Quadrupole Mass Spectrometer. Two clear results of
this ﬁrst phase of activity were:
(1) The Case eﬀect, whatever its cause, is not normally or always present in catalyst samples, even those
certiﬁed by Case as being “active”.
(2) 4He is not a natural or normal component of these catalyst materials.
Signiﬁcantly diﬀerent results were obtained in a second campaign after a visit by Case to SRI to demon-
strate his experimental procedures. Experiments were performed in pairs in nominally identical 50 cc
Nupro stainless steel sample ﬂasks modiﬁed by the e-beam welded addition of a 1/8” stainless steel
thermowell and a 1-inch Cajon VCR ﬁtting to permit admission of catalyst. 10 g samples of catalyst
were loaded into the vessels, which were then mounted and supported as shown in Figure 11.

Figure 11.
Conﬁguration of the Case experiment at SRI.

A heating element 1 mm diameter and 117 cm long was wound helically on the circumference of
the bottom third of the cells and temperature was maintained by supplying power from a computer
controlled DC supply. The two cells were mounted axially in 1-liter, 10 cm inside diameter stainless
steel dewars, surrounded by granular insulation to maintain their geometry and impose a consistent
thermal environment. A signiﬁcant change in this second phase of activity was to expose just the top of
the sample cells to ensure an axial heat ﬂow; this was found to be important both for calorimetry and
to recreate the Case eﬀect. During the course of the experiment, the currents to and voltages across
each heating element were monitored together with two thermocouples measuring temperatures in the
thermowell of each cell, and an ambient temperature sensor. Typically experiments were operated in
pairs, with one blank and one test cell, with the heater power set to keep the catalyst bed temperatures
at nearly equal values. Test cells contained Case-certiﬁed 0.4-0.5% Pd on C catalyst in D2. Blank cells
contained samples of identical catalyst in H2 or inactivated or non-catalyst carbon in D2.

After hydrogen treatments and evacuation to clean the catalyst surfaces, cells were then subjected
to an extended period “soak” in H2 to ensure by measurement that they were 4He leak-tight and that
any labile 4He sources adsorbed or absorbed on the cell inner surface or catalyst volume had been
exhausted. This period was also used to establish a reference temperature. Cells were then charged
with D2 or recharged with H2 to the reference pressure, and their heat ﬂow and helium levels monitored.
Experiments exhibited a range of behaviors. Figure 12 summarizes 6 of 16 results of helium measurements
in paired cells; these fall into three classes of behaviors:
(1) Cells that show no increase of 4He over long periods of time (including all cells operated with H2);
(2) Cells that exhibit a slow, approximately exponential increase in [4He] with time, following a trajectory
very diﬀerent from that expected for convective or diﬀusional leakage in from the ambient;
(3) Cells that display no measurable increase in [4He] for a period of several days, followed by a rapid,
approximately linear rise in [4He] to levels sometimes exceeding that of the ambient background.

Figure 12.
Results of 4He measurements from the Case experiment at SRI.

Using data from temperature sensors situated in the catalyst and gas phases it was possible to make
heat ﬂow estimates in one of two ways:
(1) Gradient method, based on the relationship between the temperature diﬀerence between the catalyst bed
and conﬁned gas, and the heater input power;
(2) Diﬀerential method, based on the temperature diﬀerences between active and the reference catalyst bed
sensors and room temperature, as a function of the relative input heater powers.
The energy estimated in excess of that provided by the heater for these two calorimetric methods is
plotted in Figure 13, together with the measured helium concentration during the time of greatest
derivative, ∂[4He]/∂t in experiment SC2. Excess heat and the apparent increase in [4He] seem to be
temporally correlated.

In an attempt to establish a quantitative correlation, Figure 6 plots the two calorimetric estimates
of excess heat production interpolated from Figure 13, versus the measured increase in [4He] (the value
plotted in Figure 13 minus the 4He initially present in the D2 gas). Regression lines through these data
incorporating the origin have slopes: Q = 31 ± 13 and 32 ± 13 MeV per 4He atom, respectively, for
the gradient and diﬀerential calorimetric methods. The Q value of ∼ 23.8 MeV expected for reaction
mechanisms consistent with D+D → 4He falls with the assigned uncertainties. The apparent shortfall
of 4He may occur for the same reasons observed in electrolytic Fleischmann and Pons studies discussed
in Sections 3.1 and 3.2. In that case the residual helium putatively formed in a new nuclear process is
released from the metal only slowly to the gas phase for analysis.

Another factor must also be considered in accounting for the 4He mass balance. In Figure 12 for
experiments SC2 and SC4.2 (D2 on United Catalysts G75D and E, corresponding to 0.4% and 0.5% Pd
on C, respectively), the ﬁnal trajectories of 4He with time show essentially the same linear decreasing
trend. It is apparent the 4He is either leaving the cell, in which case it may enter if the partial pressure
of 4He is lower inside than the ambient 5.22 ppmV/V, or else 4He is being adsorbed or absorbed onto or
into the stainless steel or catalyst solid components, in which case these must be considered as potential
sources of the observed increase.

Figure 13.
Excess energy and helium production as a function of time from the Case experiment at SRI.

The ﬁrst is unlikely since the cells were demonstrated repeatedly to be helium leak-tight. An exper-
iment performed to test the second hypothesis demonstrated clearly that 4He adsorbs or absorbs into
this class of catalyst material and also into or onto activated charcoal of similar geometry, with a rate
consistent with the declining trend in Figure 12, at similarly elevated temperatures. There is reasonable
conﬁdence that the 4He source of the rising trends in Figures 12 and 13 is not a release of stored 4He
from the catalyst for the following reasons:
(1) A helium storage mechanism is expected to be reversible. A rate such as that shown in Figure 12 should
manifest itself clearly in the 5 day hydrogen pre-soak intended to address this concern (among others)
before experiment initiation.
(2) The rate of helium sequestration in carbon and carbon catalyst materials, at room temperatures, appears
to be negligible.
(3) Multiple random samples of catalyst were subjected to direct assay for 4He by heating to temperatures
in excess of 2250K in the mass spectrometers of Clarke120 and Arata and Zhang.
In all cases these
experiments demonstrated that the volume of 4He contained with Pd on C catalyst materials was less
than that in an equivalent volume of air.

We conclude, tentatively, that helium is produced in a process that involves deuterium, but not hydrogen,
which evolves heat commensurate with a nuclear mechanism consistent with a D+D → 4He reaction.
Even taking account of the rate of helium re-ad/absorption, the mean value of the 4He falls below that
expected (assuming 23.8 MeV reaction energy) from the measured heat evolution. These observations
regarding released 4He are consistent with those made in studying electrolytic Fleischmann and Pons
cells. Calculating the excess power density normalized to the volume of Pd for Cell SC2, we obtain a
maximum value of ∼ 50 W cm−3, also consistent with the values observed in electrolytic loading of Pd.
Further attempts to replicate the Case eﬀect and the above-described results are underway at ENEA
Frascati.


APPENDIX C: THE ARATA AND ZHANG EFFORT

Arata and Zhang have been major contributors to the research area under discussion. Dr. Arata came
from the plasma fusion community. He and his colleague Dr. Yue-Chang Zhang began working as a
team on cold fusion in about 1989. Their researches have been carried out in cooperation with other
material scientists, including H. Fujita, who gave the Honda Memorial Lecture on atom clusters in 1994.

In the early 1990s their researches led them to develop the DS (Double Structure) cathode, which
is a Pd bottle whose “outer structure” is the wall of a Pd bottle and whose “inner structure” is ﬁlled
with Pd-black. In 1994, they published observations of excess heat using open-cell DS-cathodes83 and
water-ﬂow Dewar calorimetry similar to that described in Appendix A. In a continuous 3-month run
Arata and Zhang observed excess heat power averaging about 15 Watts. Data from another run shows a
heat balance for about 11 days, followed by 12 days with excess heat power averaging ∼ 80 W, with the
output heat ∼ 1.8 times input energy. An initiation time with no excess heat eﬀect was seen in these, and
in all other experiments with DS cathodes. Two additional 100-day runs exhibiting continuous excess
heat of about 10 W were published in 1995.121 Three additional runs showing ∼ 10 – 20 W excess heat
were published in 1996.122,123 One of these runs continuously produced excess heat for 6 months. In
another run, a mechanical pressure gauge was ﬁtted to the DS cathode and measured the gas pressure
inside the Pd bottle. During much of the run, the pressure gauge pinned at 800 bar. Excess heat power
was much reduced when the pressure was less than 200 bar. Excess heat studies continued through
2002. An especially important result is presented in a more recent publication.124 In this run, the inner
cathode consisted of metal powder derived from an oxidized Zr65Pd35 alloy, showing that powders other
than Pd-black can produce excess heat. In 1998, a pair of DS cathodes were run in series, with one DS
cathode in D2O electrolyte and the other in H2O electrolyte. The DS cathode in D2O electrolyte showed
excess heat rising to 20 W, while the one in H2O electrolyte showed no excess heat.125

Replication Eﬀort at SRI:
A pair of DS cathodes prepared by Arata and Zhang were operated at SRI under conditions closely
similar to those employed in Japan. Two nominally identical cells were exercised cathodically within
intentionally similar cells, one in 0.3M LiOD and the other in 0.3M LiOH. Calorimetric accuracy was less
than that normally present in the SRI Mass Flow Calorimeters because of the need to operate at very
high input power levels to exceed the threshold current density on large area cathodes. It was also not
possible to submerge the Arata-Zhang cell completely in the constant temperature bath. Nevertheless,
the results obtained at SRI118 conﬁrm the excess heat results published earlier by Arata and Zhang. In
the same range of input powers, the heavy water cell clearly yielded more output heat than the light
water cell when operated simultaneously and monitored with the same instruments.
The maximum
excess power observed in D2O was 9.9±1.3% of the measured power input, with the average value being
approximately half the maximum. The measured excess power exceeded the experimental uncertainty
(1-2% depending on conditions) for a period of ∼ 86 days to produce an integrated energy excess of
64 ± 6 MJ for the D2O cell. For the H2O cell in the same period of time, the measured energy excess
was −1 ± 6 MJ.

At the conclusion of the experiment, both cathodes were removed and placed successively in a sealed
chamber where they were punctured mechanically, and the gas contents of the cathode void volumes
extracted for analysis. The Pd black powders also were removed and the Pd metal walls of the hollow
cathodes were sectioned for 3He and 4He analysis. Signiﬁcant amounts of tritium and 3He (from the
decay of tritium) were found inside the interior of the DS cathode electrolyzed in heavy water. Small
amounts of 4He were attributed to atmospheric contamination. Detailed results and conclusions from
this work126 and the results of later analyses are summarized here:
(1) Production of tritium was between 2 and 5 x1015 atoms.
(2) Assuming that the 3He is from tritium decay, independent determinations of both quantities allows for
a determination of when the tritium was generated. Modeled as a single event, the generation of tritium
computed from the measured yields occurred during the period of cathodic electrolysis.
(3) There is deﬁnite evidence of excess 3He from tritium decay in all samples of gas, Pd bulk metal and Pd
black from the D2O experiment.
(4) Samples of Pd taken from a similar and contemporaneous electrode run with H2O show low 3He levels
consistent with blank Pd.
(5) Measurements of the 3He gradient through the 3.5 mm wall of the D2O cathode show that the 3He is
the decay product of tritium, which diﬀused from a source inside the electrode void volume (see Figure
(6) A ∼ 30% increase in tritium levels in the D2O electrolyte measured by liquid scintillation methods is
quantitatively consistent with the integral ﬂux of tritium departing the cathode void and registered in
the cathode walls.
(7) The total inventory of tritium in the initial electrolyte and its increase, while substantial, represents only
0.05% of the total tritium mass balance following the experiment.
(8) No evidence was found for 4He in the interior gas (in the hollow within the cathode) or in the metal,
that was quantitatively consistent with the measured excess heat.

Figure 14.
The 3He proﬁle as a function of radius observed in an Arata-type, double structured cathode experiment at
SRI.

The results of gas, metal and electrolyte phase 3He and tritium analyses compel the conclusion that
tritium was sourced in, on or adjacent to the Pd black in the void of the D2O double-structure cathode.
While neither sought nor expected, this result provides suﬃcient evidence of the formation of a wholly
nuclear product in an essentially electrochemical experiment to merit further study. Of concern, however,
is the apparent absence of 4He.

Excess Heat and Helium:
Having convinced themselves that non-chemical heat production within DS cathodes is a real phe-
nomenon, Arata and Zhang sought to identify helium nuclear products using quadrupole mass spec-
troscopy. They constructed a welded stainless steel manifold vacuum system evacuated with clean turbo
pumps. They also built a small furnace system for outgassing metal powder test samples, and later
developed a protocol using a Ti getter pump for removing chemically reactive gases from test volumes of
desorbed gas. The manifold system included two dedicated mass spectrometers: one normally used to
repeatedly scan the mass-4 peak structure, and the other to repeatedly scan the mass-3 peak structure.
The initial analysis program was restricted to a study of desorbed gases from furnace-heated, as-received
and post-run Pd-black. The quadrupole instruments were very clean and had moderate mass resolution.
Arata and Zhang routinely observed the 4He+ peak resolved from the D+
2 peak.123 The gas desorption
studies127 provided compositional analysis of both strongly bound gases (released at T > 1000oC) and
less strongly bound gases (released at T < 800oC). They repeatedly demonstrated that post-run Pd
powder always showed easily measurable 4He+ peaks, whereas as-received Pd powder showed no de-
tectable 4He+ peaks. In 1998, they detected 3He+ within a resolved mass-3 peak structure. They found
that they could often measure 3He even when the mass-3 peak was not resolved. The 3He+ fraction
could be distinguished from the HD+ fraction by measuring the peak height as a function of ion source
voltage.128 The helium signal always made its appearance at a higher voltage due to its higher ionization
potential. In 1999, following the experiment at SRI118 and post-test sampling126 described above, Arata
and Zhang expanded their studies to include analysis of intergranular and ullage gas from the interior
volume of one of their DS cathodes. They added an aliquot sampling volume to their manifold and built
an assembly for piercing the DS cathode and for collecting gas samples. They used their system to collect
both prompt release gas samples from the room temperature DS-cathode and slow release gas samples
from the moderately heated DS-cathode.
The helium signals were strong and clean. Measurements
corresponded to a total 4He production ∼ 0.05% of that required to explain the run-integrated excess
heat measured for the test cathode.129

Whether 0.05% as observed in Osaka or 0.00% observed in similar experiments performed at SRI,
the discrepancy relative to the integrated excess heat is large, and this diﬀerence has not been resolved.
Possible explanations are:
(1) The measurement of heat in both laboratories was substantially in error and no 4He should be expected.
The heat associated with the generation of tritium (measured as 3He by Arata and Zhang) would be
unmeasurable in either calorimeter.
(2) Heat was produced in the cathode void by nuclear reaction of D, but the bulk of product helium was
lost before sample collection due to micro-fractures, which occur in surface-stressed Pd, as described by
A. Farkas.130
(3) Heat was produced as in Fleischmann and Pons electrolytic cells at the cathode outer surface where
loading, deuterium chemical potential, and stimulation are the greatest. The helium produced was only
tenuously attached to the Pd surface and vented to the atmosphere in the Arata Zhang electrolytic cells,
which are helium permeable.n In this case, one must ascribe a secondary, not primary purpose for the
cathode void and its enclosed Pd black, which conﬂicts with the hypothesis of Arata and Zhang.

This is an important question that will be resolved as a result of continued experimentation underway
at Osaka University, SRI, and ENEA Frascati.
nIn other words, helium from the outer surface is not collected and measured in these experiments.


REFERENCES
1. M. Fleischmann, S. Pons and M. Hawkins, J. Electroanal Chem., 201, p.301 (1989); Errata, 263 p. 187
(1990). See also M. Fleischmann, S. Pons, M.W. Anderson, L.J. Li and M. Hawkins, J. Electroanal. Chem.,
287, p. 293 (1990).
2. S.E. Jones, E.P. Palmer, J.B. Czirr, D.L. Decker, G.L. Jensen, J.M. Thorne, S.F. Taylor and J. Rafelski,
“Observation of cold nuclear fusion in condensed matter,” Nature 338 737 (1989).
3. E.
Storms,
“Calorimetry
for
cold fusion:
methods,
problems
and
errors,”
http://www.lenr-
canr.org/acrobat/StormsEcalorimetr.pdf
4. S. Pons and M. Fleischmann, Proc. ICCF1, p. 1 (1990).
5. D. Gozzi, P. L. Cignini, M. Tomellini, S. Frullani, F. Garibaldi, F. Ghio, M. Jodice and G. M. Urciuoli, Proc.
ICCF2, p. 21 (1991).
6. M. C. H. McKubre, R. Rocha-Filho, S. I. Smedley, F. L. Tanzella, S. Crouch-Baker, T. O. Passell, and J.
Santucci, Proc. ICCF2, p. 419 (1991).
7. D. Macdonald, M.C.H. McKubre, A. C. Scott and P. R. Wentrcek, I & EC Fundamentals, 20, p. 290, (1981).
8. M.C.H. McKubre, R.C. Rocha-Filho, S. I. Smedley and F. L. Tanzella, ”Calorimetry and electrochemistry in
the D/Pd System”, Proc. ICCF1, p. 20 (1990).
9. K. Kunimatsu, N. Hasegawa, A. Kabota, N. Imai, N. Ishikawa, H. Akita and Y. Tsuchida, ”Deuterium loading
ratio and excess heat generation during electrolysis of heavy water by a palladium cathode in a closed cell
using a partially immersed fuel cell anode,” Proc. ICCF3, p. 31 (1992).
10. N. Hasegawa, N. Hayakawa, Y. Tsuchida, Y. Yamamoto, and K. Kunimatsu, Proc. ICCF4, Vol. 1, p. 3-1
11. M. C. H. McKubre and F. Tanzella, Proc. ICCF7, p. 230 (1998).
12. L. Bertalot, L. Bettinali, F. DeMarco, V. Violante, P. De Logu, T. Dikonimos Makris and A. La Barbera,
Proc. ICCF2, p. 3 (1991).
13. S.E. Koonin and M. Nauenberg, “Cold fusion in isotopic hydrogen molecules,” Nature 339, 690 (1989).
14. J. O’M. Bockris and A. K. N. Reddy, Modern electrochemistry; an introduction to an interdisciplinary area,
New York, Plenum Press (1970).
15. S.
Pons,
M.
Fleischmann,
C. T. Walling,
J. P. Simons,
International PCT Patent Application
PCT/US90/01328, International Patent number WO 90/10935 (1990).
16. L. Bertalot, A. DeNinno, F. DeMarco, A. La Barber, F. Scaramuzzi, V. Violante, “Excess power production
in electrolysis experiments and ENEA Frascati,” Proc. ICCF5, p. 34 (1995).
17. E. Storms, Proc. ICCF6, p. 105 (1996).
18. E. Storms, “Relationship between open-circuit-voltage and heat production in a Pons-Fleischmann cell,”
Proc. ICCF7, p. 356 (1998).
19. M. Swartz and G. Verner, “Excess heat from low-electrical conductivity heavy water spiral-wound
Pd/D2O/Pt and Pd/D2O-PdCl2/Pt Devices,” Proc. ICCF10, (2004).
20. S. Pons and M. Fleischmann, Proc. ICCF2, p. 349 (1991).
21. M. Fleischmann, Proc. ICCF5, p. 152 (1995).
22. M. H. Miles, S. Szpak, P. A. Mosier-Boss, and M. Fleischmann, Proc. ICCF9, p. 250 (2002).
23. Proc. ICCF4, Vol. 2, p. 18-1 (1993).
24. E. Storms, “Some characteristics of heat production using the “cold fusion” effect,” Proc. ICCF4, Vol. 2,
p. 4-1 (1993).
25. L. Case, in his oral presentation at ICCF10.
26. M.C.H. McKubre, S. Crouch-Baker, A.M. Riley, S. I. Smedley and F. L. Tanzella, ”Excess power observations
in electrochemical studies of the D/Pd system; the influence of loading” Proc. ICCF3, p. 5 (1992).
27. M. C. H. McKubre, S. Crouch-Baker, F. L. Tanzella, S. I. Smedley, M.Williams, S.Wing, M. Maly-Schreiber,
R. C. Rocha-Filho, P. C. Searson, J. G. Pronko, and D. A. Koehler, Development of Advanced Concepts for
Nuclear Processes in Deuterated Metals, EPRI Report TR-104195, August 1994.
28. A. Takahashi, A. Mega, T. Takeuchi, H. Miyamura, and T. Iida, Proc. ICCF3, p. 79 (1992).
29. T. Aoki, Y. Kurata, E. Ebihara, N. Yoshikawa, Proc. ICCF4, Vol. 2, p. 23-1 (1993).
30. E. K. Storms, ”A study of those properties of palladium that influence excess energy production by the
”Pons-Fleischmann” effect”, (1996) http://www.lenr-canr.org/acrobat/StormsEastudyofth.pdf
31. F. De Marco, A. De Ninno, A. Frattolillo, A. La Barbera, F. Scaramuzzi, and V. Violante, Proc. ICCF6, p.
145 (1996).
32. A. Takahashi, T. Takeuchi, T. Iida, and M. Watanbe, “Neutron spectra from D2O-Pd cells with pulse
electrolysis,” Proc. Provo meeting, p. 323 (1990).
33. A. Takahashi, T. Iida, T. Takeuchi, A. Mega, S. Yoshida and M. Watanabe, “Neutron spectra anc controllability
by PdD/Electrolysis cell with low-high current pulse operation,” Proc. ICCF2, p. 93 (1991).
34. J. O’M Bockris, D. Hodko, and Z. Minevski, “The mechanism of deuterium evolution on palladium: Relation
to heat bursts provoked by fluxing deuterium across the interface,” Proc. ICCF2, p. 337 (1991).
35. E. Yamaguchi, and T. Nishioka, ”Direct evidence for nuclear fusion reactions in deuterated palladium,”
Proc. ICCF3, p. 179 (1992).
36. H. Sugiura and E. Yamaguchi, Proc. ICCF7, p. 366 (1998).
37. E. Yamaguchi and H. Sugiura, Proc. ICCF7, p. 420 (1998).
38. C. Bartolomeo, M. Fleischmann, G. Larramona, S. Pons, J. Roulette, H. Sugiura, and G. Preparata, “Alfred
Coehn and after: The α, β, γ of the palladium-hydrogen system,” Proc. ICCF4, Vol. 1, p. 19-1 (1993).
39. F. Celani, A. Spallone, P. Tripodi, A. Petrocchi, D. DiGioacchino, P. Marini, V. DiStefano, S. Pace, and A.
Mancini, Proc. ICCF5, p. 57 (1995).
40. F. Celani, A. Spallone, P. Tripodi, D. DiGioacchino, P. Maini, V. DiStefan, A. Mancini, and S. Pace, Proc.
ICCF6, p. 93 (1996).
41. G. Preparata, Proc. ICCF6, p. 136 (1996).
42. M.C.H. McKubre, S. Crouch-Baker, A.K. Hauser, S.I. Smedley, F.L. Tanzella, M.S.Williams, and S.S. Wing,
”Concerning reproducibility of excess power production”, Proc. ICCF5, p. 17 (1995).
43. J. Tian, X. Z. Li, W. Z. Yu, D. X. Cao, R. Zhou, Z. W. Yu, Z. F. Jiang, Y. Liu, J. T. He, and R. X. Zhou,
“Anomalous heat flow and its correlation with deuterium flux in a gas-loading deuterium-palladium system,
Proc. ICCF9, p. 353 (2002).
44. J. O’M Bockris, et al., Proc. ICCF4, Vol. 2, p. 1-1 (1993).
45. X. Z. Li, B. Liu, N. N. Cai, Q. M. Wei, J. Tian, and D. X. Cao, Proc. ICCF10, (2004).
46. Y. Iwamura, M. Sakano, and T. Itoh, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 41 4642 (2002).
47. Y. Iwamura, T. Itoh, M. Sakano, S. Sakai, and S. Kuribayashi, “Low energy nuclear transmutation in
condensed matter induced by D2 gas permeation through Pd complexes: Correlation between deuterium flux
and nuclear products,” Proc. ICCF10, (2004).
48. D. Letts and D. Cravens, “Laser stimulation of deuterated palladium: Past and present,” Proc. ICCF10,
(2004).
49. D. Cravens and D. Letts, “Practical techniques in CF research: Triggering methods,” Proc. ICCF10, (2004).
50. T. O. Passell, Proc. ICCF5, p. 603 (1995).
51. T. O. Passell, Proc. ICCF9, p. 299 (2002).
52. J. Dash, Proc. ICCF6, p. 477 (1996).
53. T. Bressani, “Nuclear products in cold fusion experiments, comments and remarks after ICCF-6,” Proc.
ICCF6, p. 703 (1996).
54. L. C. Case, ”Catalytic fusion of deuterium into helium-4”, Proc. ICCF7, p. 48 (1998).
55. M. H. Miles and B. Bush, ”Search for anomalous effects during D2O Electrolysis Using Palladium Cathodes”,
Proc. ICCF3, p. 189 (1992). See also: M. H. Miles, B. Bush, and J. J. Lagowski, ”Anomalous effects involving
excess power, radiation, and helium production during D2O electrolysis using palladium cathodes”, Fusion
Technol. 25, 478, 1994. B. F. Bush, J. J. Lagowski, M. H. Miles, and G. S. Ostrom, ”Helium production
during the electrolysis of D2O in cold fusion”, J. Electroanal. Chem. 304 (1991) 271. M. H. Miles, R. A.
Hollins, B. F. Bush, J. J. Logowski and R. E. Miles, ”Correlation of excess power and helium production
during D2O and H2O electrolysis using palladium cathodes”, J. Electroanal. Chem. 346 (1993) 99.
56. B. Bush and J. J. Lagowski, ”Methods of generating excess heat with the Pons and Fleischmann effect:
Rigorous and cost effective calorimetry, nuclear products analysis of the cathode and helium analysis”, Proc.
ICCF7, p. 38 (1998).
57. E. Botta, R. Bracco, T. Bressani, D. Calvo, V. Cela, C. Fanara, U. Ferracin, and F. Iazzi, “Search for 4He
production from Pd/D2 systems in gas phase,” Proc. ICCF5, p. 233 (1995).
58. E. Botta, T. Bressani, D. Calvo, C. Fanara, and F. Iazzi, “Measurements of 4He production from D2 gasloaded
Pd sample,” Proc. ICCF6, p. 29 (1996).
59. G. S. Qiao, X. L. Han, L. C. Kong, S. X. Zheng, H. F. Huang, Y. J. Yan, Q. L. Wu, Y. Deng, S. L. Lei, and
X. Z. Li, ”Nuclear products in a gas-loading D/Pd and H/Pd system”, Proc. ICCF7, p. 314 (1998).
60. D. Gozzi, R. Caputo, P. L. Cignini, M. Tomellini, G. Gigli, G. Balducci, E. Cisban, S. Frullani, F. Garibaldi,
M. Jodice, G. M. Urciuoli, ”Excess heat and nuclear product measurements in cold fusion electrochemical
cells”, Proc. ICCF4, Vol. 1, p. 2-1 (1993).
61. J. O’M. Bockris, C. Chien, D. Hodko, and Z Minevski, ”Tritium and Helium Production of Palladium
Electrodes and the Fugacity of Deuterium Therein”, Proc. ICCF3, p. 231 (1992). C-C Chien, D. Hodko,
Z. Minevski and J. O’M. Bockris, ”On an electrode producing massive quantities of tritium and helium”, J.
Electroanal. Chem. 338 (1992) 189.
62. B. Y. Liaw, P.-L. Tao and B. E. Liebert, ”Recent progress on cold fusion research using molten salt techniques”,
Proc. ICCF2, p. 92 (1991).
63. H. Sakaguchi, G. Adachi, and K. Nagao, ”Helium Isotopes from Deuterium Absorbed in LaNi5”, Proc.
ICCF3, p. 527 (1992).
64. J. R. Morrey, M. W. Caffee, H. Farrar, IV, N. J. Hoffman, G. B. Hudson, R. H. Jones, M. D. Kurz, J.
Lupton, B. M. Oliver, B. V. Ruiz, J. F. Wacker, and A. Van Veen, ”Measurements of helium in electrolyzed
palladium”, Fusion Technol. 18 (1990) 659.
65. Y. Arata and Y-C. Zhang, ”Helium (4He, 3He) within deuterated Pd-black”, Proc. Japan Acad. 73B (1997)
1.
66. Y. Arata and Y-C. Zhang, ”Achievement of solid-state plasma fusion (”cold fusion”), Proc. Japan Acad. 71
Ser. B (1995) 304.
67. A. G. Lipson, A.S. Roussetski, G.H. Miley, and E.I. Saunin, Proc. ICCF8, p. 231 (2000).
68. A. G. Lipson, A.S. Roussetski, G.H. Miley, and C. H. Castano, Proc. ICCF9, p. 218 (2002).
69. M. H. Miles, “Correlation of excess enthalpy and helium-4 production: A review,” Proc. ICCF10, (2004).
70. M.C.H. McKubre, et.al., Energy Production Processes in Deuterated Metals, EPRI Report TR-107843-V1
(1998).
71. F. Cellucci, P. L. Cignini, G. Gigli, D. Gozzi, M. Tomellini, E. Cisbani, S. Frullani, F. Garibaldi, M. Jodice,
and G. M. Urciuoli, Proc. ICCF6, p. 3 (1996).
72. A. De Ninno, A. Frattolillo, A. Rizzo and E. Del Giudice, Proc. ICCF9, p. 82 (2002).
73. A. De Ninno, A. Frattolillo, A. Rizzo, and E. Del Giudice, “4He detection in a cold fusion experiment,”
Proc. ICCF10, (2004).
74. S. Pons and M. Fleischmann, “Heat after death,” Proc. ICCF4, Vol. 2, p. 8-1 (1993).
75. M. Fleischmann and S. Pons, Phys. Lett. A 176 118 (1993).
76. M. Bernardini, C. Manduchi, G. Mengoli, and G. Zannoni, “Anomalous effects induced by D2O electrolysis
at titanium, Proc. ICCF8, p. 39 (2000).
77. M. H. Miles, M. A. Imam, and M. Fleischmann, Proc. ICCF8, p. 105 (2000).
78. M. Fleischmann, Proc. ICCF9, p. III (2002).
79. I. Dardik, H. Branover, A. El-Boher, D. Gazit, E. Golbreich, E. Greenspan,A. Kapusta, B. Khachatorov, V.
Krakov, S. Lesin, B. Michailovitch, G. Shani
∗
and T. Zilov, Proc. ICCF10, (2004).
80. M. H. Miles, K. B. Johnson, and M. A. Imam, “Heat and helium measurements using palladium alloys in
heavy water,” Proc. ICCF6, p. 20 (1996).
81. M. F. Klopfenstein and J. Dash, “Thermal imaging during electrolysis of heavy water with a Ti cathode,”
Proc. ICCF7, p. 98 (1998).
82. E. Storms, “Excess power production from platinum cathodes using the Pons-Fleischmann effect,” Proc.
ICCF8, p. 55 (2000).
83. Y. Arata and Y-C. Zhang, Proc. Japan Acad., 70(B), 106 (1994).
84. S. E. Jones, D. Bennion, D. Buehler, J. B. Czirr, D. L. Decker, J. Harb, R. Hunter, G. L. Jensen, E. P.
Palmer, W. Pitt, S. Taylor, J. Thorne, D. Tolley, and J. C. Wang, Proc. Provo meeting, p. 206 (1990).
85. S. E. Jones, T. K. Bartlett, D. B. Buehler, J. B. Czirr, G. L. Jensen, and J. C. Wang, Proc. Provo meeting,
p. 397 (1990).
86. F. Celani, A. Spallone, L. Liberatori, B. Stella, F. Ferrarotto, M. Corradi, P. Marini, S. Fortunati, and M.
Tului, Proc. Provo meeting, p. 62 (1990).
87. P. I. Golubnichyi, A. D. Philonenko, A. A. Tsaric, E. P. Kovalchuk, G. I. Merzon, and V. A. Tsarev, “Observation
of nuclear particles and their correlation with acoustic and electromagnetic emission from palladium
targets loaded with deuterium,” Proc. Provo meeting, p. 146 (1990).
88. P. I. Golubnichyi, A. D. Philonenko, A. A. Tsaric, V. V. Kuzminov, B. V. Pritchenko, G. I. Merzon, and
V. A. Tsarev, “Recording of neutron and acoustic emissions from palladium target in a low background
underground experiment,” Proc. Provo meeting, p. 151 (1990).
89. M. Okamoto, Y. Yoshinaga, M. Aida, and T. Kusunoki, Proc. ICCF4, Vol. 2, p. 3-1 (1993).
90. S. E. Jones, J. E. Ellsworth and M. R. Scott, F. W. Keeney, A. C. Johnson, D. B. Buehler, F. E. Cecil, G.
Hubler, and P. L. Hagelstein, “Neutron emissions from metal deuterides,” Proc. ICCF10, (2004).
91. K. L. Wolf, “Nuclear reactions in deuterated metals,” EPRI Progress Report, March 1992.
92. K. L. Wolf, private communication, 1993.
93. F. E. Cecil, H. Liu, D. Beddingfield, and C. S. Galovich, Proc. Provo meeting, p. 375 (1990).
94. S.E. Jones, F.W. Keeney, A.C. Johnson, D.B. Buehler, F.E. Cecil, G. Hubler, P.L. Hagelstein, J.E. Ellsworth
and M.R. Scott, “Charged particle emissions from metal deuterides,” Proc. ICCF10, (2004).
95. A. De Ninno, A. Frattolillo, G. Lollobattista, L. Martinis, M. Martone, L. Mori, S. Podda, F. Scaramuzzi,
Europhys. Lett. 9 221 (1989).
96. A. De Ninno, F. Scaramuzzi, A. Frattolillo, S. Migliori, F. Lanza, S. Scaglione, P. Zeppa, and C. Pontorieri,
“The production of neutrons and tritium in the deuterium gas-titanium interaction,” Proc. ICCF2, p. 129
(1991).
97. H. O. Menlove, M. A. Paciotti, T. N. Claytor, H. R. Maltrud, O. M. Rivers, D. G. Tuggle, and S. E. Jones,
“Reproducible neutron emission measurements from Ti metal in pressurized D2 gas,” Proc. Provo meeting,
p. 287 (1990).
98. H. O. Menlove, M. A. Paciotti, T. N. Claytor, and D. G. Tuggle, “Low-background measurements of neutron
emission from Ti metal in pressurized deuterium gas,” Proc. ICCF2, p. 385 (1991).
99. T. Bressani, D. Calvo, A. Feliciello, C. Lamberti, F. Iazzi, B. Minetti, R. Cherubini, A. M. I. Haque, and R.
A. Ricci, “A study of the neutron emission from Ti loaded with D in gas phase by means of a time-of-flight
spectrometer,” Proc. ICCF2, p. 105 (1991).
100. M. Agnello, E. Botta, T. Bressani, D. Calvo, A. Feliciello, P. Gianotti, F. Iazzi, C. Lamberti, B. Minetti,
and A. Zecchina, “Measurement of 2.4 MeV neutrons from Ti/D and Pd/D systems, Proc. ICCF3, p. 433
(1992).
101. A. De Ninno, F. Scaramuzzi, C. Pontorieri, and P. Zeppa, “Emission of neutron bursts from a titaniumdeuterium
gas system in a high-efficiency low-background experimental setup,” Proc. Provo meeting, p. 122
(1990).
102. F. Scaramuzzi, “Survey of gas loading experiments,” Proc. ICCF2, p. 445 (1991).
103. M. Fleischmann, “An overview of cold fusion phenomena,” Proc. ICCF1, p. 344 (1990).
104. D. Gozzi, P. L. Cignini, R. Caputo, M. Tomellini, G. Balducci, G. Gigli, E. Cisbani, S. Frullani, F. Garibaldi,
M. Jodice, and G. M. Urciuoli, “Experiments with global detection of cold fusion byproducts,” Proc. ICCF3,
p. 155 (1992).
105. H. Ogawa, S. Yoshida, Y. Yoshinaga, M. Aida, and M. Okamoto, “Excess heat and neutron emission in
Pd-Li-D electrolysis,” Proc. ICCF5, p. 116 (1995).
106. A. Takahashi, T. Inokuchi, Y. Chimi, I. Ikegawa, N. Kaji, Y. Nitta, K. Kobayashi, and M. Tanaguchi,
“Experimental correlation between heat and nuclear products,” Proc. ICCF5, p. 69 (1995).
107. A. Takahashi, “Results of experimental studies on excess heat vs. nuclear products correlation and conceivable
reaction model,” Proc. ICCF7, p. 378 (1998).
108. Y. Oya, H. Ogawa, M. Aida, K. Iinuma, and M. Okamoto, “Material conditions to replicate the generation
of excess energy and the emission of excess neutrons,” Proc. ICCF7, p. 285 (1998).
109. H. Liu, Studies of nuclear reactions D-D, D-6Li, and D-10B at low energies and charged particle emission
from deuterium-metal systems, PhD Thesis, Colorado School of Mines, 1992.
110. A. G. Lipson, A.S. Roussetski, G.H. Miley, and E.I. Saunin, Proc. ICCF8, p. 231 (2000). A. G. Lipson,
A.S. Roussetski, G.H. Miley, and C. H. Castano, Proc. ICCF9, p. 218 (2002).
111. A. G. Lipson, A.S. Roussetski, G.H. Miley, and E.I. Saunin, “Phenomenon of an energetic charged particle
emission from hydrogen/deuterium loaded metals,” Proc. ICCF10, (2004).
112. J. Kasagi, T. Ohtsuki, K. Ishu and M. Hiraga, Phys. Soc. Japan 64, 777 (1995).
113. E. K. Storms, ”A critical evaluation of the Pons-Fleischmann effect”,
http://www.lenr-canr.org/acrobat/StormsEacriticale.pdf
114. M. Fleischmann, ”Thermal and nuclear aspects of the Pd/D2O system; Volume 2”, SPAWAR System
Center Report TR-1862 (2002).
115. S. Pons and M. Fleischmann, ”Calorimetric measurements of the palladium/deuterium system: Fact and
fiction”, Fusion Technol. 17 (1990) 669.
116. S. E. Jones, L. D. Hansen, S. E. Jones, D. S. Shelton and J. M. Thorne, ”Faradaic efficiencies less than
100% during electrolysis of water can account for reports of excess heat in ”cold fusion” cells”, J. Phys. Chem.
99 (1995) 6973.
117. F. G. Will ”Hydrogen + oxygen recombination and related heat generation in undivided electrolysis cells,”
J. Electroanal. Chem. 426 (1997) 177.
118. M.C.H. McKubre, F. L. Tanzella, P. Tripodi and P. L. Hagelstein, ”The emergence of a coherent explanation
for anomalies observed in D/Pd and H/Pd systems: Evidence for 4He and 3He production,” Proc. ICCF8,
p. 3 (2000).
119. W. B. Clarke, Fusion Science and Technology, “Production of 4He in D2-loaded palladium-carbon catalyst
I,” 43 (1) 122 (2003).
120. W. B. Clarke, W. J. Jenkins and Z. Top, ”Determination of tritium by mass spectrometric measurement
of 3He”, Int. J. of Appl. Radiat. Isot., 27, p. 515 (1976).
121. Y. Arata and Y-C. Zhang, Proc. Japan Acad., 71(B), 98 (1995).
122. Y. Arata and Y-C. Zhang, Proc. ICCF6, p. 129 (1996).
123. Y. Arata and Y-C. Zhang, J. High Temperature Society, 23, 1 (1997).
124. Y. Arata and Y-C. Zhang, Proc. Japan Acad. 78(B), 57 (2002).
125. Y. Arata and Y-C. Zhang, “Anomalous difference between reaction energies generated within D2O-Cell
and H2O-cell,” Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 37, L1274 (1998).
126. W. B. Clarke, B. M. Oliver, M.C.H. McKubre, F. L. Tanzella and P. Tripodi, ”Search for 3He and 4He in
Arata-style palladium cathodes II; Evidence for tritium production”, Fusion Science and Technology, 40 (2)
(2001).
127. Y. Arata and Y-C. Zhang, “Deuterium nuclear reaction process within solid,” Proc. Japan Acad. 72(B),
179 (1996).
128. Y. Arata and Y-C. Zhang, “Presence of Helium (4He, 3He) confirmed in deuterated Pd-black by the ’vieffect’
in a ’closed QMS’ environment,” Proc. Japan Acad. 73B, 62 (1997).
129. Y. Arata and Y-C. Zhang, “Anomalous production of gaseous 4He at the inside of ’DS-cathode’ during
D2O-electrolysis,” Proc. Japan Acad. 75B, 281 (1999).
130. A. Farkas, “On the electrolytic separation of the hydrogen isotopes on a palladium eathode,” Trans. Faraday
Soc. 33, 552 (1937).

The conference proceedings cited in this bibliography are:
Proc. Provo meeting (1990):
Anomalous Nuclear Effects in Deuterium/Solid Systems, Provo, UT 1990, American Institute of Physics: Conference
Proceedings, edited by S.E Jones, F. Scaramuzzi, and D.H. Worledge, 228.
Proc. ICCF1 (1990):
Proceedings of the First International Conference on Cold Fusion, Mar. 1990 Salt Lake City, UT, edited by F.
Will.
Proc. ICCF2 (1991):
The Science of Cold Fusion, Proc. of the Second Annual Conference on Cold Fusion, Como, Italy, June 29-July
4, 1991, edited by T. Bressani, E. Del Giudice and G. Preparata, Published by Societa Italiana di Fisica, 33.
Proc. ICCF3 (1993):
Frontiers of Cold Fusion, Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Cold Fusion, Oct. 1992 Nagoya,
Japan, edited by H. Ikegami, Universal Academy Press, Tokyo.
Proc. ICCF4 (1993):
Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Cold Fusion, Dec. 1993 Maui, Hawaii, edited by T. O.
Passell and M. C. H. McKubre.
Proc. ICCF5 (1995):
Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Cold Fusion, Monte Carlo, Monaco April 9-13, 1995, IMRA
Europe, Sophia Antipolis Cedex, France (1995).