1. Introduction

We have considered a number of possible theoretical approaches over the that
past several years that may be relevant to a description of the anomalies that
have been reportedly observed in metal hydrides and metal deuterides.1 The primary
experimental claims at this point include: [1] excess energy production in
electrochemical experiments at a level that could not possibly be chemical ( with
essentially no associated radiation); [2] tritium production, without secondary neutron
emission (the tritium, if real, must be born nearly stationary); and [3] neutron
emission. There also exists claims of experimental evidence in support of
4 He production, host lattice activation, x-ray emission, gamma emission, and beta
emission.

Many involved in the experimental efforts mentioned above hold that the existence
of the anomlies is now proven; many involved in mainstream physics research
(and most of the scientific community) hold that none of the anomaHes are real.
This difference of opinion appears to be a stable feature of the field, and there appear
to be no prospects to resolve the differences any time soon. In our research,
we take the experimental claims for which the evidence seems to be strongest, and
study theoretical mechanisms that appear to be relevant. While the nature of the
experimental claims excludes many possible mechanisms and reactions, they unfortunately
do not generally make positive statements that would clearify reaction
pathways or underlying mechanisms.

For any theory to begin to be relevant to claims of this sort, two fundamental
issues must be addressed: [1] there must be a mechanism that allows for the
transfer of a large amount of energy from the atomic scale to the nuclear scale;
and [2] there must also be a mechanism that will allow nuclei to react in the most
general sense. The second point is usually cast in terms of overcoming the Coulomb
barrier, but in light of the discussion in the present work, this is too restrictive. Our
studies have consequently focused on mechanisms for anomalous energy transfer,
and also on new nuclear reaction pathways involving charge neutral reactants for
which no Cou􀂂omb barrier problem occurs.

2. Anomalous Energy Transfer

We have considered during the past several years the possibility of anomalous 
energy transfer with the phonon modes in ·a lattice. Basic energy transfer mecha­
nisms with vibrational modes in molecules and solids were understood in the 1930s; 
the creation and destruction of phonons in a lattice was described by Lamb2 and 
later by Mossbauer3; frequency-shifting of phonon modes in the molecular case was 
described by Duschinsky4• Anomalous energy transfer through the creation and 
destruction of phonons does not appear to be feasible; instead, we have examined 
energy transfer by frequency shifting phonons that are already present. 5 In this 
case, the energy transfer is 
where N is the number of phonons present, and where cw is the associated fre­
quency shift. 

For this energy to be anomalously large, we require a large number of phonons 
N to be present (which could be developed by a phonon laser, for example). We 
also require a lattice with special properties: it must have a phonon spectrum 
that contains a band gap, and phonon modes must jump a band gap due to a 
modification of the lattice at a single site. Many metal hydrides contain a band 
gap between the acoustic and optical phonon modes; the basic theory for how 
phonon modes are altered due to mass or force constant changes at a single site 
was studied by Dawber and Elliott6• 

This mechanism alone appears to be capable of producing anomalies if the 
appropriate conditions can be met. For example, phonon gaps may be produced 
in metal hydrides if host lattice vacancies occur at impurity levels. In this case, 
processes that alter the number of host lattice vacancies can mediate anomalous 
lattice energy transfer. We have computed decay rates for this general process for 
a variety of recoil and nuclear decay channels.7 For example, lattice-induced recoil
of deuterons will lead to dd-fusion reactions with predicted neutron production 
rates that are in the general range of those claimed in experiments. This gen­
eral mechanism could in principle produce anomalous alpha and beta decays; the 
associated reaction rates are reported in Ref. 7. 


3. Proposed Surface Phonon Laser

Anomalous energy transfer through the route described in the last section pre­
supposes the existence of a large number of phonons per mode N; we know that 
this could be produced by a phonon laser. Phonon lasers are known, and phonon 
lasing on acoustic modes up to 0.87 THz has been reported in the literature.8 The
energy exchange mechanism that we arc interested in requires the existence of an 
optical phonon laser that operates near 6-8 THz. 

Phonon las·ers are in many ways analogous to optical lasers, as both require the 
development of a population in version ( or else the development of parametric gain). 
There exist few proposals for driving an optical phonon laser, although it would 
be reasonable to expect that optical pumping of impurities in a low temperature 
transparent crystal could be extended to optical phonons. Such techniques are not 
readily extended to metal hydrides, and the requirement that gain be developed 
at room temperature makes the problem far more severe since the optical phonon 
lifetimes are expected to be quite short (on the order of a picosecond) under these 
conditions. 

We have recently proposed that exothermic desorption of a metal hydride can 
be used to drive a surface phonon laser.9 If we consider the potential for molecular
hydrogen near a clean metal surface, 10 we note that molecular hydrogen is not 
stable at the surface and is in fact pushed away (see Figure 1). Hydrogen in 
the metal can be either at lower or higher energy than the molecular energy. In
the case that the energy is higher, so that the desorption is exothermic, then the 
situation becomes in some sense a phonon analog of an excimer laser. 

Phonons can stimulate the desorption, and some of the desorption energy will 
go into the phonon modes that initially caused the desorption; in the event that 
the desorption is exothermic, then there exists the possibility of stimulated phonon 
emission and phonon gain. The hydrogen desorption from PdH probably becomes 
exothermic near a loading of 0.83; the situation is expected to be similar for 
desorption from PdD. 

Figure 1. Schematic energy of H2 minimum potential energy surface near a metal 
hydride surface. 

Quantum desorption models have been studied in the literature (see for example 
Ref. 11). A basic description relevant to the present discussion could be developed 
starting from 
This model includes hydrogen atoms at site i, free molecular hydrogen with mo­
mentum k, phonon modes indexed by q and u, and phonon-dependent desorption 
and adsorption terms. A linearization of the desorption potential in the phonon 
mode operators results in a Hamiltonian that can describe a one-phonon laser 
amplifier. 

Perhaps the simplest quantitative estimate for the desorption flux required to 
sustain such a phonon laser comes from a balance between surface phonon creation 
and destruction; net gain is present when more phonons are generated than de­
stroyed. If we imagine that a surface phonon mode is initially very highly excited, 
so that a significant fraction of the desorption power is converted to stimulated 
phonon power, then the threshold e:ondition is equivalent to the statement that as 
many phonons are generated as destroyed. For surface optical phonons modes, the 
number of phonons required in this example is perhaps on the order of unity per 
atom participating; consequently the number of phonons destroyed per unit time 
is the product of the mode volume V, the relevant density n, and the destruction 
rate 1/r. The number of phonons generated per unit time is the product of the 
exothermic desorption flux Jdeai weighted by the number of phonons generated per 
desorption event N, and mode surface area A. We obtain 
The required desorption flux for normal surface optical phonon modes obtained 
from this argument is very high, on the order of 1028 molecules/cm2sec. Such 
a desorption flux is not sustainable, even on a microscopic timescale, either by 
conventional diffusion or by thermodynamically-forced diffusion.12 

Figure 2. Estimated desorption energy for PdH versus loading. 

Inspection of equation (3) indicates that the constraint on the desorption flux 
in the case of an impurity mode can in principle be lower by a dilution factor. 
For example, liost lattice vacancies at the per cent level has been proposed to lead 
to an "impurity" optical phonon band within the PdD phonon band gap. The 
participating deuterium atoms are those within a cell containing a vacancy, which 
occurs at a reduced density; consequently, the threshold desorption current should 
be considerably less (on the order of 1026 molecules/cm2sec). If a dominant mode 
of release of molecular deuterium from the surface of a highly loaded cathode is 
through local explosive exothermic desorption events that last on the order of a 
nanosecond , then such events may be sufficient to drive an optical phonon laser 
on dilute impurity modes. 

The existence of such a mechanism would be critical for the operation of the 
physical mechanisms under discussion in section 2, and in the following sections. 
In addition this type of mechanism appears to be consistent with recent correlation 
of excess heat with flux discovered recently by the SRI group.13


4. Neutron Hopping

While there have been several proposals for mechanisms that may lead to en­
hanced screening of the Coulomb potential between nuclei, we have abandoned 
fusion reaction mechanisms generally (as candiates for heat and tritium produc­
tion) in the belief that the amount of screening required is nonphysical. Our 
deliberations have driven us through a string of relatively exotic reactions, finally 
reaching a new class of reactions that may all be classed under the generally head­
ing of "neutron hopping" reactions.14 It is well known that electrons hop in solids, 
and the basic model that describes this hopping can be applied almost directly to 
examine the possibility of neutron hopping. 

The neutron mixed valence Hamiltonian that describes the coupling between 
bound and continuum neutron states is 
Neutron hopping is only expected in nuclei with s-wave valence neutrons and 
two neighboring stable isotopes; elements ·which satisfy this requirement include: 
hydrogen, helium, silicon, cadmium, tin, tellurium and xenon. 

We recently investigated neutron hopping in silicon, in the hopes of developing 
an experiment that would exhibit the effect cleanly. The basic idea is that 2s 
neutrons from 29Si would hop among neighboring 28Si nuclei, and from time to 
time be captured by 29Si to make 30Si; this capture process would lead to a gamma 
at 2.1 MeV. Crystalline silicon has a diamond lattice structure, which consists of 
two interpenetrating FCC lattices. Virtual neutrons originating from one FCC 
sublattice are Bragg scattered by the other and delocalized; the gamma emission 
rate for this structure is obtained from fourth order perturbation theory 
In this formula, state 1 refers to a 29Si valence neutron on the first sublattice, 
state 2 refers to a 29Si valence neutron on the second sublattice, state 3 refers to a 
free neutron, and state 4 refers to a gamma captured 30Si neutron; the interaction 
potentials ¼i are of the form of given in the neutron mixed valence Hamiltonian. 
This gamma emission rate can be evaluated approximately (after much algebra); 
we obtain in the high temperature limit 
where V0 is the volume-averaged nuclear matrix element (about 20 meV), NB is the 
number of Brillouin zones contributing (about 30 near the melting point),, is the 
capture rate for a free virtual neutron ( about 2.5 sec-1 ), f.D is the neutron binding 
energy (8.4 7 Me V), and &M is the lattice energy transfer in the Mossbauer limit 
(uncertain, but perhaps on the order of 10-10 eV). The f factors are fractional site
occupation probabilities. The exponential factor comes about from destructive 
interference of the continuum Bragg waves, limited by the requirement that the 
virtual neutron scattering generates no phonons; the effective energy barrier is 
where a is the lattice constant (2.715 A), < Juj 2 > is the mean square thermal 
center of mass displacement, M is the nuclear mass of 28Si, and 0m is the Debye 
temperature (about 525 K). This relation may also be written as 
where w0 is the characteristic vibrational frequency. 

The gamma emission rate in this case is unfortunately too small to be observ­
able. The emission rate is highest near the melting point (1683 K); the prefactor 
is respectable ( ~ 10-13 sec-1 ), but the exponential ( due to destructive interference 
of the Bragg waves) reduces the rate by more than 60 orders of magnitude. 

Consequently, we turn to the question as to whether the effect would be ob­
servable in other systems. Upon inspection of the various factors that make up 
the effective energy D.f. for the diamond lattice structure, it appears that only two 
quantities are of importance: the nuclear mass and Debye temperature. Lighter 
nuclei could exhibit in principle a much greater effect. Of the candidate elements 
with outer s-wave neutrons, by far the most interesting candidate is hydrogen: vir­
tual neutron originating from deuterium have the best chance of being delocalized 
by Bragg scattering from nearby protons in an ordered lattice. This argument 
assumes that the relevant nuclear matrix element (which we have not yet com­
puted for deuterium) is of comparable magnitude. For example, the vibrational 
frequency w0 for the deuterons in PdD is roughly the same as for the silicon nuclei 
in crystalline Si (the lattice structure is that of NaCl, so that a somewhat different 
proportionality may occur); the barrier energy D.f. in this case should be much less. 

If these arguments are correct, then we would expect that a metal hydride 
that is loaded with a mixture of deuterium and hydrogen would exhibit neutron 
hopping if heated suddenly, as a thermally-induced bulk effect, with an effective 
energy on the order of an electron volt. The presence of the effect should be 
observable through gamma emission. Computations of this process are ongoing. 


5. Neutron Hopping Coupled with Anomalous Energy Transfer

For the past several years we have examined various approaches to the problem 
of neutron hopping to an inequivalent nucleus coupled with the lattice energy 
transfer mechanism. A neutron hopping onto a nucleus generally will lower the 
phonon mode frequency, which leads to an energy transfer that has the wrong 
sign for heat production. We proposed that impurity modes due to host lattice 
vacancies could shift up through a recoil upon neutron capture that reduced the 
number of vacancies. While it seemed to be clear that the energy transfer through 
frequency shifting could be driven by a neutron transfer in principle, the frequency 
shifting mechanism leaves the lattice in a state which cannot use the same phonons 
for subsequent energy transfers. 

This problem is in general serious. If phonons were used only once then lost, 
then the maximum efficiency would be much less than one; the experimental claims 
for heat production are larger than this. We have proposed earlier that the phonons 
could be frequency-shifted back down by a Raman process, and replaced when 
lost by phonon gain. While this may be possible in principle, it is by no means 
compelling. 

Here we propose a speculative alternate solution that may have some advan­
tages. We propose to couple an exothermic neutron hopping reaction with an 
endothermic lattice-induced decay process, and then require that the phonon dis­
tribution not be changed significantly during the combined process. Such a mech­
anism could be repeated without a loss of phonons; it has the additional advantage 
that the reaction rate for the coupled process will be faster than the rate for the 
neutron hopping part of the reaction alone, since the lattice-induced processes are 
so fast. 

For example, we consider a virtual neutron that originates from a deuteron, 
resonantly Bragg scatters off of nearby protons in a metal hydride, and then lands 
on 28Si with enough recoil to dislodge it so as to change the number of host lattice 
vacancies. If the process were conservative so far, then the lattice would be highly 
excited and unstable against a rapid decay of the host lattice, the fastest of which 
would be lattice-induced alpha decay of a low Z nucleus. Since the lattice decay is 
so fast, it is reasonable to couple it with the preceding reaction as a second order 
process,7 which need not conserve energy in the intermediate state. The associated 
decay rate of a deuteron through this route can be computed from 
In this formula, 6fL is the energy excess determined by the difference in neutron 
binding energies of the donor and acceptor nuclei, taking into account the energy 
transfer with the lattice: 
and state 5 includes the results of the lattice-induced decay. 

This mechanism is currently the focus of our theoretical investigations. While 
we have not yet evaluated this rate in detail, certain aspects of the reaction rate 
appear at this point to be plausible. We expect the total reaction rate to be 
perhaps of the form 
The prefactor here is reduced from that encountered in the last section by VjJ L).fLi 
the fractions f can be on the order of unity; the effective energy L).f ought to be 
less than 1 eV. The probability that the appropriate recoils occur, and that the 
coupling between the initial, intermediate and final lattices is phonon conservative, 
will appear as an exponential damping factor (taken to be e-0 here, the magnitude
of which is presently unknown). Finally, the lattice-induced decay gives rise to a 
very large rate ,i ( on the order of 1020 sec-1 for each nucleus i in the lattice that
is capable of causing a useful phonon mode gap jump; this results in a potential 
increase in the total rate over the results of the previous section. 

One interesting feature of this type of theory is that it does not require that 
the lattice actually has the very large number of phonons required for a complete 
exchange of the reaction energy. Since the intermediate state is now virtual, and 
the final state lattice does not have the reaction energy (it is in the fast alpha in this 
case), the requirements on the lattice are now much reduced. Two requirements 
are seemingly apparent however: (1) given the combinatorial number of available 
phonon states, the lattice states with frequency-shifted phonon modes had best 
have large coupling matrix elements and be well separated in energy to avoid 
destructive interference effects; and (2) given the fast (psec) decoherence time 
of the optical phonon modes, unless phonon gain is present on the gap jumping 
modes, the number of atoms that can take place in the final alpha decay process 
will be limited. Further study of this mechanism will determine the applicability 
of the theory to experiments reporting heat and tritium production. 


6. Conclusions

We have reviewed key aspects of our theoretical approach to account for anoma­
lies claimed in recent experiments with metal hydrides. We have focused on two 
new physical effects: [l) lattice energy transfer by frequency shifts of phonon 
modes, and [2) neutron hopping. Neither of these mechanisms has been proven 
experimentally, yet we contend that both effects are predicted from quantum me­
chanics. 

Specific results that are new since ICCF4 include: [1] a proposal for a surface 
phonon laser driven by exothermic desorption; [2] that neutron hopping should 
lead to second order gamma emission as a thermally-induced bulk effect; [3] the 
observation that Bragg scattering of virtual neutrons by the internal unit cell 
structure is important (especially for nuclei with outer s-wave neutrons); (4) the 
conclusion that the primary donor or acceptor nuclei for heat or tritium production 
must involve outers-wave neutron orbitals; [5] that neutron hopping should work 
much better with light nuclei; [6) that the energy exchange with the lattice during 
a neutron hop in the Mossbauer limit is nontrivial and must be included properly. 
The formula for second order gamma emission, as well as the theory outlined in 
section 5 constitute new theoretical results. 

We conclude that there exist routes within conventional theory both for anoma­
lous energy transfer and for a new class of reactions based on neutron hopping. 
The theory outlined in section 5 describes excess heat and tritium production 
mechanisms, perhaps similar to the experimental claims; further calculations and 
comparisons with experiment are required to determine whether it is correct in 
detail. The phonon laser route to energy transfer outlined in sections 2 and 3 can 
result in neutron, alpha, beta and gamma production, also perhaps relevant to the 
experimental claims. The neutron hopping/gamma emission process outlined in 
section 4 is a bulk effect, and may be more easily verifiable experimentally. 

Quantitative predictions specific to the various metal hydrides for thermally­
induced second order gamma emission will soon be available; these predictions can 
be tested experimentally, and can be used to prove or disprove a major part of the 
present theory. Heat production according to the theory of section 5 a neutron 
transfer from deuterium to silicon, and a low Z alpha decay; this can be proven 
or disproven through measurements of silicon isotopic ratios, and detection of the 
alpha decay products. 


References 

As discussed, for example, in more than 20 experimental papers presented
at this conference.
W. E. Lamb, "Capture of Neutrons by Atoms in a Crystal," Phys. Rev., 55,
190 (1939).
R. L. Mossbauer, "Kernresonanzfluoreszenz von Gammastrahlung in Ir191, 
Z. Physik., 151 124 (1958).
F. Duschinsky, "Zur Deutung der Elektronenspektren mehratomiger Molekule,"
Acta Physiochemica (URSS), 7, 521 (1937).
P. L. Hagelstein, "A Possible Mossbauer Effect in Neutron Capture," Hyper­
fine Interactions, 92, 1059 (1994).
P. G. Dawber and R. J. Elliott, "The Vibrations of an Atom of Different
Mass in a Cubic Crystal," Proc. Phys. Soc., 81, 483 (1963).
P. L. Hagelstein, "Lattice-Induced Atomic and Nuclear Reactions," Trans.
Fusion Tech., 26, 461 (1994).
P. Hu, "Stimulated Emission of 29-cm-1 Phonons in Ruby," Phys. Rev.
Lett., 44,417 (1980_).
P. L. Hagelstein, "Proposed Novel Optical Phonon Laser Pumped by Exother­
mic Desorption," Bull. APS, 40, 808, (1995).
10. J. Harris, "On Vibrationally-Assisted Dissociation of H2 at Metal Surfaces,"
Surface Science, 221, 335, (1989).
11. E. Goldys, Z. W. Cartel and H. J. Kreuzer, "Desorption Kinetics Mediated
by Surface Phonon Modes," Surface Science, 116, 33 (1982).
C. Bartolomeo, M. Fleischmann, G. Larramona, S. Pons, J. Roulette, H.
Sugiura, "Alfred Coehn and After: the a, /3, 1 of the Palladium-Hydrogen
System," Trans. Fusion Tech., 26, 23 (1994).
13. M. C. H. McKubre, S. Crouch-Baker,· s. I. Smedley, and F. L. Tanzella, "The
Measurement of Excess Power in the D /Pd System under nearly Isothermal
Conditions," presented at ICCF5 (this conference); (1995).
14. P. L. Hagelstein and S. Kaushik, "Neutron Transfer Reactions," Proc. ICCF4,
vol. 1, 10-1 ( 1994 ).
