1. INTRODUCTION

At the Fusion Research Laboratory at the University,
of Missouri-Columbia, experiments to study a new
potential method of initiating cold fusion in solid-state
materials has begun. This method utilizes a Maxwellian
plasma to load solid-state target materials such as palladium,
nickel, tantalum, titanium, rhenium, and tithium
with deuterium. To date, the necessary diagnostics to
measure deuterium-loading factors have not been developed
for this experiment. It will be assumed that this
method will at least have loading factors of 0.7 (deuterium
atoms/palladium atoms). A loading factor of 0.7 is
obtainable by simply exposing the palladium to deuterium
gas. (1)

The target material was substituted for the collector
in retarding potential ion energy analyzer. An ion energy
analyzer was chosen because it mitigates the Debye
shielding effect which prevents optimal ion collection.
This ion energy analyzer was then placed into the point
of a simple mirror machine called the Modified Missouri
Magnetic Mirror Experiment (M4X). The Max was used
as the ion source and as a vacuum vessel for sub-atmospheric
deuterium tests.

The M4X is a microwave heated plasma device ca-pane of generating a wide range of plasma conditions
and is a recent upgrade of the Missouri Magnetic Mirror
Prototype experiment (M3pX). The differences between
the two devices is shown in Table I. (It should be noted
that by varying microwave power the bulk electron temperature
can vary from 1-10 eV and the bulk ion temperature
from 0.5-10 eV.) This new experimental device,
the MaX, uses water-cooled copper coils. The M4X device
has incorporated an upgrade to the coil power sup-plies which allows electron cyclotron resonance heating
with a 10.5-GHz, 10-kilowatt power supply obtained on
surplus in addition to the 2.45-GHz, 2.5-kW power supply
already being used. Some additional work has been
done on the vacuum vessel of this device which improves
the conductance to the vacuum pumps, and improves
diagnostic accessibility. Additionally, a 10-kilowatt
tuneable RF power supply (2-5 MHz) has been added
for ion cyclotron resonance heating experiments. The
availability of the electron cyclotron resonance heating
and the ion cyclotron resonance heating will provide a
variety of ion temperatures. Additionally, the vacuum
vessel of the M4X has a gas manifold which will allow
a choice of ion masses.

The diagnostic package used for the cold fusion
work included: (1) a 0.15-meter long by 0.025-meter
diameter BF3 probe encased in a 0.15-meter diameter
polyethylene moderator. The electronics package is contained
in a Ludlum model 2200 digital counter for neutron
counting, (2) sodium iodide detector with a Nucleus
PC II MCA for gamma spectroscopy, (3) two geiger
counters to measure gamma-rays, (4) gold foils for neutron
detection, (5) Langmuir probes for electron temperature,
density, and distribution function measurements,
(6) variable energy analyzer for ion temperature, density,
and distribution function measurements, (7) thermocouples
on both the palladium sample and the BF3
probe, (8) bolometer for charged particle measurements,
(9) residual gas analyzer for gas analysis, and (10) helium
leak detector for He detection.


2. EXPERIMENTAL SET-UP

The cold fusion target was designed to fit into the
mirror field point of the M4X as shown in Fig. 1. The
neutron detector was 0.45 m from the palladium target.

Two types of targets were used in the experiments reported in this paper. The first target was designed to
have the optimum capability to collect ions. Using a
simple electrode or a Langmuir probe would lead to low
ion currents due to Debye shielding effects. Therefore
the Fusion Research Laboratory's expertise in ion energy
analyzers was used to design a gridded target which collects
several orders of magnitude greater current than a
Langmuir probe or an electrode. The design is shown in
Fig. 2.

The second target was a simple Langmuir probe
used primarily in the sub-atmospheric studies 


3. THE M4X DATA-ACQUISITION SYSTEM


The VEA, bolometer, Langmuir probe, thermocouples,
and machine status (magnet current, microwave
power, vacuum) were all taken on a digital data acquisition
system (Fig. 4). Analog signals were channeled
to a Bi Ra 5909 32 channel A/D converter in a CAMAC
crate then loaded via GPIB to a Macintosh II. Data on
the actual current to the probe was also taken in this
fashion. Initial analysis and storage was accomplished
with Labview software developed by National Instruments.
All other data was taken manually and recorded
in bound notebooks.


4. EXPERIMENTS


4.1. Experiment 1, 3/27 to 4/16/89


A sample of palladium tubing was obtained for the
initial experimental effort. The palladium tubing was
crushed into the shape of a flat rectangular disk (7 mm
by 7 mm by 0.25 ram). The crushed palladium was
mounted in the ion energy analyzer configuration and
was placed in the point of the M4X operating in the
mirror mode.

A base pressure of 9 x 10 -7 Torr was established
in the M4X for 24 hrs. After this 24 hour period, a low
Ar flow rate through the M4X was established. A plasma
was formed with microwave heating and background
neutron readings were taken. The background readings
were 1 + 13 neutrons per 7 min counting period. Background
counts were taken over 3 hours.

A low D 2 flow rate was established in the M4X.
Neutron and gamma-ray measurements were made at
this point and readings of 3 + 1.73 neutrons per seven
min counting period and 0.03 mR/hr were observed. A
plasma was formed and the magnetic field and microwave
power were varied during the experiment.

When the deuterium plasma was formed, there was
an increase in neutron counts and gamma-ray readings
to 11 _+ 3.317 neutron counts per 7-min period and 0.07
mR/hr, respectively. The ion density in this plasma was
1 x 10 x~ deuterium ions per cm 3 with an ion temperature
of 1.5 eV. Thermocouple, measurements indicated that
the palladium temperature increased from 69-90~ during
the 10-min run (see Fig. 5).

The plasma was turned off and the neutron and gamma-ray readings dropped to 4 __ 2 neutron counts per
7-min period and 0.02 mR/hr, respectively. When the
plasma was re-started, the neutron counts increased to
8 +_ 2.8 neutron counts per 7-min period and the gamma
readings increased to 0.06 mR/hr. The plasma parameters
were consistent with those of the first run, however
the palladium temperature rose to ll0~ The duration
of the exposure of palladium to the plasma was 30 min.

After the plasma was turned off, the neutron counts
and gamma-ray readings dropped to background levels
for 10 min, and then they abruptly increased to 7-+2.6
neutron counts per 7-min period and 0.1 mR/hr. It was
noted that the palladium temperature started at 110~ and
had dropped to about 80~ when the neutron and gammaray
readings increased. We believe that the temperature
of the palladium was an important factor in the increased
neutron and gamma-ray activity. After 10 min, the palladium
sample was taken out of the vacuum vessel and
the neutron and gamma activity immediately dropped to
background levels. The gold foil was taken out and examined
for activity. There was no activity probably due
to the low level of neutron production.


4.2. Experiment 2, 4/17 to 4/27/89

A new sample was made from crushed palladium
tubing (7 mm by 7 mm by 0.25 mm). The M4X achieved
a base pressure of 7 x 10 .7 for 48 hrs. Background readings
were taken with Ar and D2 plasma while the sample
was being built. These background readings were 40 -+ 6.3
neutrons per 30-rain counting period. The sample of palladium
was then placed into the ion energy analyzer
target and the target was put in the point region of the
M4X. Residual deuterium gas pressures of i x 10 -5 Torr were measured in the chamber. During that time neutron
counts were observed. 

Apparent production of neutrons at sub-atmospheric
pressures was observed over a 9-hour period. The peak
rate of neutron production was 297_ 17.2 counts per 30-
rain period. After the 9-hour count, an experiment to
evaluate temperature effects was initiated. The thermocouple
wire was used as a resistive heating element. As
the sample was being heated, the neutron counts abruptly
dropped to background level when the temperature reached
100~ (see Fig. 6). The gold foil did not have sufficient
activation to indicate neutron production.


4.3. Experiment 3, 5/12 to 5/20


A 25.4-mm by 25.4-mm by 0.5-mm palladium foil
was used in the configuration shown in Fig. 3. The target
was placed in the point of the M4X. During the experiment,
both plasma and pressure were used to initiate
neutron counts. As seen in Fig. 7, neutron backgrounds
were taken over a period of 140 hours. Neutron counts
above background were observed at both relatively high
D2 pressure and very low D 2 pressure.

There appears to be a cyclic behavior in the neutron
count rate (counts were staggered between day, evening,
and early morning to eliminate the possibility of periodic
noise). The peak neutron count rate was about 100 sigma
above background.

About 200 hours into the experiment, an unusual
8.1 MeV (about 3 MeV broad) gamma peak was observed
(see Fig. 8). Clearly the gamma-ray energy is too
high to be associated with natural background and had
to come from prompt gamma emission. The 3 MeV full
width half maximum of the 8.1 MeV gamma peak is
also unusual and not well understood at this time. The gold foil did not have sufficient activation to indicate
neutron production.


5. CONCLUSIONS

The experiments conducted between March 27 and
May 20, 1989 have had sufficiently interesting results
which warrant further research. Apparent neutron and
gamma-ray production was observed during our first experiment
which utilized a Maxwellian plasma to load the
palladium target. During the second experiment, subatmospheric
concentrations of deuterium were sufficient
to exhibit apparent neutron production. During the second
experiment, the sample was heated while yet producing
neutrons, and the neutron production abruptly
ceased when the sample temperature exceeded 100~
No gamma-ray production was observed during the second
experiment however. During the third experiment,
it took nearly 150 hours of pressure cycling before neutron
production was observed. No significant gammaray
output was evident until nearly 200 hours into the
experiment when a mysterious broad 8.1 MeV peak was
seen.

There are many questions which remain to be resolved
before these experiments can be explained. We
are improving our neutron counting methods, for example,
by implementing He 3 detectors and by actually
examining each of the pulses generated by the detector. Also, gas samples will be taken from the exhaust of the
roughing pumps and examined for tritium decay. (Our
residual gas analyzer never yielded any useful data due
to molecular complexes of deuterium and hydrogen which
have mass readings of 3 (HD), 4 (D2), 5 (D2H), and 6
(D3). Therefore, it was impossible to distinguish between
these molecular complexes and the expected fusion
products T, TD, T2, He 3, and He4).

We believe that there are too many unknown variables
which make it difficult to perform a good controlled
experiment. For example, the role of sample
preparation is an important issue. The different samples
used in these experiments appear to behave differently.