Preface 

Cold fusion has the potential to meet a substantial portion of the world’s energy needs. Although it 
was rejected by mainstream science within a year or so after it was announced in 1989, it has 
continued to be pursued by many highly qualified scientists worldwide. Many of them began their 
investigations in the exciting months and years after 1989. As a pariah science, cold fusion has 
attracted relatively few new researchers in the more than 30 years since the announcement.  

The LENR Research Documentation Initiative (LRDI) is underway at LENRGY, LLC to capture 
the records of these pioneering researchers while the material is still available. This objective is 
being supported with this project to document the cold fusion records of the University of Utah. 

Thanks go in particular to David Nagel, not only for his invaluable assistance with this University 
of Utah project, but also for his long-term support of the LRDI. Marianne Macy was very helpful 
via emails during the visit to the University campus. She and her late husband, Michael Melich, 
were responsible for setting up many, if not most, of the files reviewed for this project.  

Gratitude is also expressed to the Anthropocene Institute for financial support for this project. The 
staff at the University – Liz Carpenter, Betsey Welland and David Buford – were extremely 
helpful and very cordial. 
 

Summary  

Cold fusion originated at the University of Utah, when Fleischmann and Pons announced it at a 
press conference on March 23, 1989. A project is being performed to document the cold fusion 
files that are still available at the University. It is being undertaken in the LENR Research 
Documentation Initiative (LRDI), whose overall objective is to capture cold fusion research 
records while they are still available. The LRDI is a program at the firm LENRGY, LLC. 

The project began with careful review of the website of the University’s Marriott Library, along 
with download of relevant materials. A trip was made in August 2021 to review the University 
holdings. Substantial cold fusion records were found for several organizations and individuals. 

They comprise more than 530 boxes of materials. Records of the work of Fleischmann and Pons, 
such as lab notebooks or other information on experiments, were not found for this project.  

Particular emphasis during the site visit was placed on three sets of records: 1) the National Cold 
Fusion Institute (NCFI); 2) FEAT (Future Energy Applied Technology) and ENECO, and 3) Bruce 
Lewenstein (“Cold Fusion Collection”). The NCFI files are in the University archives, and the 
information on the other two is in the Marriott Library Collections. As the files were reviewed, a 
significant portion of them was also scanned. Additional records are available for individual 
contributors, including Beaudette, Bockris, Chubb (Talbot), Hibbard, Jones and Melich, but were 
not reviewed for this project. 

Despite the relatively short life of the NCFI, from August 1989 to June 1991, its records are 
substantial and comprise 15 boxes of materials, all of which were reviewed. The FEAT/ENECO 
files are large, making up half of the University’s 530 cold fusion file boxes. Two of the nine 
categories of records – Research and Personnel – were selected for review. An item of particular 
significance in the Lewenstein (“Cold Fusion Collection”) archive is an April 1995 Briefing Book 
prepared for a cold fusion presentation to the US Congress.  

Future opportunities include individual in-depth projects for each set of files located and a more 
thorough search for additional cold fusion records at the University. The records reviewed so far, 
and particularly the files for individuals that could not be reviewed during the visit, form the 
foundation of additional projects within – and outside – the scope of the LRDI. LRDI participants 
may be encouraged to contribute their files to the Marriott Library Collections in the future.  


1 Introduction 

The University of Utah is the birthplace of cold fusion. March 23, 1989 may be considered its 
birthdate. The University is also the main location of cold fusion’s conception and prenatal 
development – for at least five years before its birth at a press conference. Stanley Pons, chairman 
of the University’s Chemistry Department, received his Ph.D. at the University of Southampton in 
England. There he met and became friends with Martin Fleischmann, who was on the faculty (but 
was not Pons’ supervising professor). The friendship resulted in visits by Fleischmann to the 
University after he retired. It was during these visits that Fleischmann and Pons developed their 
cold fusion ideas and begin tested them with experiments. 

Substantial records exist at the University of Utah of the activities and events before and after the 
1989 announcement. A trip was made to the University in August 2021, to review, describe and 
document these records. The purpose of this report is to provide the results of the review.  
Research records of Fleischmann and Pons, such as lab notebooks or other information on 
experiments, were not found for this project. 

The three most prominent collections at the University – for the National Cold Fusion Institute 
(NCFI), the Future Energy Applied Technology (FEAT) company and its successor (ENECO), and 
the Cold Fusion Collection (Lewenstein Materials) – are reviewed in some detail. The remaining 
collections, for individual contributors, are noted with descriptions that are currently available 
online at the University’s library website. Methods used are described, and additional potential 
work (future opportunities) is delineated. 

Appendices are included for the press release for the press conference and of the records for the 
NCFI and FEAT/ENECO..  


2 Overview of the University of Utah Cold Fusion Archives 

Preparation for the visit to the University of Utah included work on the Marriott Library website 
and phone calls and email exchanges with staff in the collections department. The website has 
excellent research and download capabilities, which were utilized for two terms –  “cold fusion” 
and “LENR”. The results of the website search1 are shown in Table 2-1. 

The total number of boxes in all of the collections is about 530. The full set of the descriptions 
comprises more than 250 pages. 

The records are at two locations on campus, the Marriott Library and the University Archives2. 
The files are professionally managed at both. Photos of the locations are in Figure 2-1. The rooms 
for reviewing files are shown in Figure 2-2. The types of boxes containing the files are shown in 
Figure 2-3. 

No files were found at either location for the cold fusion research by Martin Fleischmann and Stan 
Pons. Such files may exist elsewhere at the University but were not located during this visit. 

Figure 2-1 
The Marriott Library (Left) and the University Archives 

Figure 2-2 
Reviewing Rooms at the Marriott Library and the University Archives 

Figure 2-3 
File Containers Used at the Marriott Library and the University Archives
 
The files fall generally into two categories – organizations and individuals. Emphasis was placed 
mainly on organizations for this project. Three sets of files were selected for review – National 
Cold Fusion Institute, FEAT/ENECO and the Cold Fusion Collection (Bruce Lewenstein files). 
They are descried in Sections 4, 5 and 6 of this report. The NCFI records, the first item in Table 2-
1, is at the University Archives. The others are at the Marriott Library. The first two pages of the 
downloaded collections descriptions for the NCF and FEAT/ENECO are shown in Figures 2-4 and 
2-5 as examples of the information provided and the appearance. 

Figure 2-4 
First Two Pages of Collection Descriptions for the NCFI Records 

Figure 2-5 
First Two Pages of Collection Descriptions for the FEAT/ENECO Records 


3 National Cold Fusion Institute 

The National Cold Fusion Institute (NCFI) was established at the University of Utah with funding 
from the Utah Legislature. The organization is characterized as shown below in the downloaded 
description of the file collection: 
The National Cold Fusion Institute was established on August 14, 1989 as a non-profit corporation to seek 
external funding for cold- fusion research and to pursue scientific patents. The Institute closed on June 30, 1991. 
This collection contains budgets, correspondence, legal contracts, memoranda, minutes, news articles, reports, 
and patent applications from the Office of Director of the National Cold Fusion Institute. 

Shortly after Professors B. Stanley Pons and Martin Fleischmann announced that they had discovered “cold 
fusion” (a process by which energy can be generated through electrochemical inducement of nuclear fusion at 
room temperature), the Utah State Legislature met in a special session and appropriated $5,000,000 to establish 
the National Cold Fusion Institute (NCFI) at the University of Utah as a non-profit corporation to seek external 
funding for additional research and to pursue scientific patents. During its brief existence, the NCFI was under 
the direction of Hugo Rossi (August to November 1989), James Brophy (November 1989 to January 1990), and 
Fritz G. Will (December 1990 to June 1991). Interest in cold fusion research quickly declined when further work 
brought no conclusive results, and the NCFI closed its doors on June 30, 1991 because state funds had run out 
and investments from private sources were insufficient for the continuation of operations. 

The purpose, organization and other characteristics of the NCFI were set forth in a document 
found in the files entitled “Establishment of the National Cold Fusion Institute (Figure 3-1).  

After leadership by internal University managers, a leader from outside, Fritz Will (Figure 3-2) 
was brought in as Director. His credentials are summarized in McKubre’s ICCF history document3 
as shown below: 
Fritz Will is a famous electrochemist who had been employed by General Electric at their corporate central 
research laboratory in Schenectady, New York from 1960 until 1990 when he took on leadership of the NCFI. 
The electrochemistry community in 1990 regarded Fritz as thorough and reliable, and about that time he was 
appointed to be President of the Electrochemical Society, the principal electrochemical society in the U.S., 
and perhaps the world. It was an interesting and significant choice to see him selected as the director of NCFI, 
for him to leave GE, and take a senior role in this emerging and turbulent field. 

Establishment of the 
NATIONAL COLD FUSION INSTITUTE 
by the  
University of Utah 
PURPOSE 
The purpose of the National Cold Fusion Institute is to carry out research and development on electrochemically 
induced cold fusion in order to establish the range of practical application of this new discovery. The Institute is 
structured to attract corporate participation and to be positioned to accept federal funding when this becomes 
available.  Successful development of the Institute can assure that Utah remains a major contributor to the science, 
engineering, and commercialization of cold fusion. 

ORGANIZATION 
The National Cold Fusion Institute is a separate, nonprofit, 501c(3) corporation headed by a full time director. 
The Board of Directors is composed of two members from the University, one faculty member, and several 
industrialists. The President of the University appoints all Board members and is Vice-chairman of the Board. The 
Chairman is elected by the Board from among the industrial members.  This structure is designed to be attractive to 
corporate participants. 

The Institute is organized into a Basic Research Division and an Applied Research Division. Research teams are 
active in four areas: Electrochemistry, Metallurgy, Physics, and Engineering. Faculty members are free to pursue 
individual research grants at the University, regardless of whether or not they are affiliated with the Institute. 

STAFFING 
The initial technical staff is composed of University of Utah faculty members supplemented by interested faculty 
from Utah State University and Brigham Young University and visiting researchers from other universities and 
industrial laboratories. A permanent staff is to be developed as rapidly as funding levels and the recruiting process 
permits. 

FACILITIES 
The NCFI is located in a rented research building at 390 Wakara Way at the University of Utah Research Park. 
The location makes the Institute separate from the University, yet provides for close cooperation between Institute 
staff and University faculty. 

FUNDING 
The state appropriation is to be used as seed funding to initiate a significant research effort quickly. Corporate 
participants are expected to provide additional support and eventually funding from the Department of Energy is 
anticipated. No financial support from the University is contemplated. 

IMPACT 
As a separate corporation, the NCFI operates much as does the University of Utah Research Institute. No 
organizational changes in the University are involved. If the promises of commercialization are achieved, the 
University stands to benefit from licensing of its patent pool and the state should experience major economic 
development. 

NOTIFICATION 
This notification is made pursuant to Utah Code 53B-17-504, which states in part, “The University of Utah has the 
following powers:...to form nonprofit corporations or foundations...” and in recognition of Utah Code 53B-16-102, 
which states,...’The board (e.g., of Regents) shall establish procedures and policies for considering institutional 
proposals for substantial alterations in the scope of existing institutional operations...”. 

Figure 3-1 
NCFI Characterization When It Was Established 

Figure 3-24 
Fritz Will, NCFI Director 

The NCFI hosted the First International Conference on Cold Fusion (ICCF-1) in March 1990, just 
a year after the March 23 announcement. The Proceedings were issued the following August. The 
cover is shown with the letter of transmittal by Fritz Will in Figure 3-3. 

The primary emphasis on securing patents was carried over to FEAT after the NCFI closed its 
doors. 

August 10, 1990 
Dear Colleague: 
I am pleased to be sending you these conference proceedings in connection with the First Annual Conference on 
Cold Fusion. As sponsors of the conference, we at NCFI and the University of Utah wish to thank you for your 
participation in the conference. We found that the exchange of ideas and information at the conference stimulated 
new experimental and theoretical research at our institute, and hope that many others were similarly prompted in 
their study of the interesting phenomena which were discussed during our meetings. 

The papers which are presented in the enclosed proceedings will give interested readers an in-depth perspective on 
the material which was presented at the conference. Like the conference itself, we feel the proceedings will lead 
researchers to a greater depth of understanding in this emerging field of inquiry. We wish to extend our thanks to 
those who prepared the material presented in this volume, to those who attended the conference, and to those who 
will pursue research in these important phenomena. 

With regards, 
TIIB NATIONAL COLD FUSION INSTITUTE 
Dr. Fritz G. Will Director 

Figure 3-3 
Proceedings Cover with Transmittal Letter by Fritz Will5 

The NCFI Collection6 consists of 15 boxes (Figure 4–4) that are located at the University 
Archives. The full contents are listed in Appendix D. 

Figure 3-4 
NCFI Collection at the University Archives 

All of the boxes were reviewed, and selected contents were scanned (Table 3-1). 

Table 3-1 
Items in the NCFI Files Selected for Scanning 


4 Future Energy Applied Technology (FEAT) and ENECO 

When the NCFI closed its doors in June 1991, efforts to secure cold fusion patents did not end. A 
commercial organization, Future Energy Applied Technology (FEAT), acquired the patent rights 
from the University of Utah and continued the pursuit of approval by the US Patent and Trade 
Office (PTO). The former NCFI Director, Fritz Will, apparently joined FEAT for a period of time.  

In support of securing cold fusion patents, a laboratory was operated to conduct research and 
verify the phenomenon to the PTO. At some point, the FEAT organization evolved into ENECO. 
A summary description of the company is provided by the Marriott Library description of its 
ENECO Files as shown below. 

Summary: The ENECO records (1912-2007) consist of patents, contracts, research, office, and financial 
documents collected by the company. ENECO (formerly FEAT) was a private company that centered on cold-
fusion technology and the commercialization of such technology. The majority of patents registered by ENECO 
were invented by scientists Stanley Pons and Martin Fleischmann. Technologies engineered by ENECO have had 
a great impact on the local and international scientific communities. 

Historical Note: ENECO was known for registering cold fusion patent technologies for the University of Utah 
and the company had claimed that they had produced excess heat from a fusion reaction (1989). Following 
problems regarding reproducibility, ENECO purchased cold fusion patents from the University registered under 
their name and scientists Pons and Fleischmann continued their work outside the country. Additionally, ENECO 
had development interests in the following non-cold fusion technologies: oxygen concentrators, N-type diamond 
semiconductors, and highly efficient thermo-electric converters. These technologies were developed under their 
individual subsidiaries (Oxydyne Inc., Semidyne, Inc., and Thermodyne Inc.). 

ENECO’s emphasis on LENR patents is clearly stated in the company’s trifold brochure (Figure 4-
1). The text of the brochure (Figure 4-2) clearly shows this emphasis. The company’s model for 
utilizing patents for commercialization was presented in 19957, some four years after the 
company’s inception. The model is summarized in a conceptual flow diagram (Figure 4-3). The 
breath of ENECO’s approach, including eight areas of emphasis, is depicted in Figure 4-4. 

Figure 4-1 
ENECO Trifold Brochure 

ENECO IS THE CATALYST FOR COLD FUSION PROGRESS 
We believe cooperation among all cold fusion participants is the fastest route to commercialization of the 
technology. ENECO is structured to accelerate the development of cold fusion intellectual property 
discovered by individuals and organizations. We help develop patentable concepts, pursue patent protection 
and offer technology licenses to industrial users. 

ENECO has acquired patent properties covering most areas of cold fusion. The company recently obtained 
exclusive rights to one of the first issued cold fusion patents. In less than two years, ENECO has become the focal 
point tor individuals and research organizations seeking development and commercial realization of the technology. 

A group of leading cold fusion researchers founded ENECO in 1991 with the conviction that this new science 
would become a major source of energy. After receiving investment funding in 1992, the company began 
worldwide sponsorship of laboratories and individual investigators. We provide research support, aggressive 
worldwide patent pursuit and generous royalty arrangements to qualified individuals and organizations. Researchers 
are invited to inquire about participation in our development programs. 

The company is uniquely structured to manage and develop intellectual property. A carefully selected staff of 
company scientists evaluates candidate research submitted by laboratories and individuals. Patent applications for 
worthy, mature concepts are prepared and filed by our in-house group of patent specialists. Other interesting, but 
less developed ideas are also considered for sponsored research. To assure a well balanced portfolio. ENECO relies 
heavily on counsel from our Science Advisory Board of prominent, independent researchers in cold fusion and 
related technologies. 

Our growing portfolio of intellectual property, and knowledge of the industry, is rapidly making ENECO the 
preferred getaway to commercial application of cold fusion. In addition to licensing technology, the company 
makes available its experienced staff to assist licensees in applying cold fusion to their products and processes. 
Indeed, early adopters of ENECO technology can gain significant competitive advantages. Contact ENECO to find 
out how cold fusion can become part of your strategic plan. 

Figure 4-2 
Text of ENECO Trifold Brochure 

Figure 4-3 
ENECO’s Model for Utilizing Patents for Commercialization 

Figure 4-4 
ENECO’s Patent Portfolio Concept
 
The primary leaders of ENECO were Fred Jaeger, President, and Yan Kucherov, Director of R&D 
(Figure 4-5). Most of the organization’s funding came from Charlie Becker of San Antonio. 
Charlie’s brother, Leroy Becker, was also involved in ENECO’s leadership. Edmund Storms 
served for a time on the Board of Directors8. Peter Hagelstein, Michael Melich and David Nagel 
served in Technical Advisory Roles. 

Figure 4-5 
Fred Jaeger in 1995 at ICCF-5 (on the right in the left panel9) and  
Yan Kucherov in 1998 at ICCF-7 

In conjunction with its leadership in the LENR Field, ENECO sponsored ICCF-7 in Vancouver, 
BC in 1998. The cover of the ICCF-7 proceedings, and the statement by Jaeger as conference 
organizer are shown in Figure 4-6. 

THE SPIRIT OF VANCOUVER 
I would like to thank everyone who took the time, effort, and money to attend the Seventh International Conference 
on Cold Fusion in Vancouver on April 19-24, 1998. The substantial preparation and advanced work of all oral and 
poster presenters, combined with active audience participation, created a spontaneously constructive environment 
for discussion. I hope all participants returned from Vancouver with a renewed sense of purpose, a deeper insight to 
guide their research, and new perspectives to broaden their thinking. 

The congenial atmosphere at ICCF-7 was a unique and rewarding experience. Perhaps the enlightened spirit was a 
result of the spectacular Vancouver scenery; or the realization, after nine years, that unity and cooperation among 
pioneering researchers may be more productive than competition. Over 200 people from 20 countries and all 
scientific disciplines gathered in Vancouver to share ideas in an attempt to understand the mechanisms responsible 
for the unequivocal laboratory results many have witnessed firsthand. Across cultural, linguistic and disciplinarian 
boundaries, scientists from widely divergent backgrounds worked together to pursue a common goal of trying to 
perfect a potentially new, clean, economical, and abundant energy source for the 21st century. 

I believe ICCF-7 marked a crucial milestone of maturation of the field from the viewpoint of science, finance, and 
human resources that will support and sustain growth for a strong new generation. 

The diversity and quality of the data presented at ICCF-7 has grown more compelling. A plethora of new, diverse 
results from a wide variety of second generation experiments help move the field closer to a better understanding of 
reaction mechanisms, and virtually eliminate the possibility that early electrochemical experiments were just some 
transient mistake. 

Figure 4-6 
Cover of ICCF-7 Proceedings and Associated Statement of Jaeger as Organizing Chairman 

Although most research activities are still critically undercapitalized, as evidenced by approximately two-thirds of 
ICCF-7 participants paying for their own attendance, decentralized self-funded research leads to highly focused lab 
activities. The self-supported fervor and dedication of current researchers provides a grass-roots resiliency and 
enthusiasm that can not be easily extinguished by adverse, external events. 

Approximately one-third of the ICCF-7 audience was new. Nine students were present, some of whom gave their 
very first presentation at an ICCF conference. One new student was elected as a ‘‘Top Ten” presenter. New and 
younger persons entering the field provide vital fresh perspectives that are crucial to continuation and growth. An 
entire second generation of scientists and managers are now carrying on the bulk of the work that was formerly 
performed by early pioneers. 

In closing, I would like to thank the International Advisory Committee for providing the opportunity for me to help 
organize ICCF-7. It was very satisfying to be able to help contribute to the growth and advancement of this 
important new field of research. 

Until we meet again at ICCF-8 in Italy, best wishes to all and good luck with your pursuits. 

Sincerely, 
Fred Jaeger  
Organizing Chairman
 
Figure 4-6(Continued) 
Statement of Jaeger as Organizing Chairman 
 
Unfortunately, the PTO has routinely rejected cold fusion patents going back to the beginnings of 
the field – and continues to do so up to the present. Some patents were secured outside the US, but 
the ENECO was ultimately unsuccessful in persuading the PTO to approve the applications for the 
Fleischmann and Pons patents obtained from the University of Utah. The patent rights were 
returned to the University in May 1997, and the patents were eventually abandoned in 199810. 
After pursuing other technologies, ENECO apparently filed for bankruptcy in about 2008. 

The University of Utah collections11 for FEAT and ENECO are large, comprising nearly half (263 
boxes) of the total of about 530 boxes of cold fusion materials. The holdings are in the Marriott 
Library Collections, where the files have been archived in nine categories (Table 4-1). Selected 
boxes (Figure 4-7) from the Collections were requested from storage for review during the onsite 
visit. 

Table 4-1 
Categories of ENECO Records at the Marriott Library 

Figure 4-7 
ENECO File Boxes Selected for Review 
The files requested for review were primarily from Categories 3 and 4 (Research and Personnel). 

The full contents of these records are presented in Appendix E. During the review, some of the 
files – those deemed most relevant to the Project – were selected for scanning. The items scanned 
are listed in Table 4-2.  

Table 4-2 
Items Selected for Scanning in the FEAT/ENECO Collection 


5 “Cold Fusion Collecton” (Bruce Lewenstein Material) 

Bruce Lewenstein reported extensively on cold fusion developments in the early months and years 
after the 1989 announcement. His large collection is archived at Cornell University, where he is on 
the faculty. The Lewenstein records at the Marriott Library12 consist of three boxes. They are 
described as follows in the Marriott library file description: 
The cold fusion collection (1987-1992) contains articles written by Bruce V. Lewenstein relating to the history 
and testing of cold fusion clippings from the Utah Chemistry Department relating to the study of cold fusion. 

A particularly relevant item in the collection is a “Congressional Briefing Book”, which was 
prepared in April 1989 for a briefing of the U.S. Congress. The document is in Box 2 of the 
collection. Its label and table of contents are shown in Figure 5-1.  

Table of Contents 
Tab 1 
Itinerary 
Tab 2 
Legislative Strategy 
Tab 3 
Talking Points 
Tab 4 
Congressional Briefing Visits: What to expect, what to do and not do 
Tab 5 
Dos and Don’ts of Testifying Before Congressional Committees 
Tab 6 
Testimony 
Tab 7 
Utah Delegation 
Tab 8 
House Science, Space, and Technology Committee 
Tab 9 
Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation 
Tab 10 House Appropriations Subcommittee on Energy and Water Development 
Tab 11 Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Energy and Water Development 
Tab 12 Congressional Schedule 
Tab 13 News Article (Economist) 

Figure 6-1 
Label and Table of Contents of Congressional Briefing Document 

Another important item in this collection is a document entitled “Cornell Cold Fusion Archive.”13 
It includes perhaps the most complete and well-documented chronology of events before and after 
the press conference in existence. It is dated 1991. A slightly revised version, dated 1994, is on the 
Cornell University website.  

The 1994 version of the Cold Fusion Archive document contains an important analysis of how 
science is conducted and the relationship between science, politics and the press. The analysis 
focuses on five major questions, shown below, which are addressed by Lewenstein in the 
document. 
• 
What role does the press play in modern science? Does the press merely disseminate the results of 
experimental investigations, or does it become an active player in the scientific process? Was its behavior in 
the cold fusion saga somehow different than in other scientific episodes? What changes in science 
communication does cold fusion foretell? 
• 
What is the place of politics in science? Are politicians just players on the outskirts of scientific investigation-
-or are they integral to modern scientific work? What does politics in science accomplish? 
• 
How important is competition between research teams? Is science fundamentally a search after nature’s 
truths, or is it a game with winners and losers? 
• 
How do patents affect research? How can a field that puts so much emphasis on priority of discovery deal 
with instances of double discoveries? How can scientific commitments to open communication be reconciled 
with intellectual property rights? 
• 
And, perhaps most fundamental, what does it mean for science when experiments are unclear? If modern 
science depends on the belief that an experiment can yield an answer, how can it deal with ambiguity and 
incoherence in the research process? 


6 Archives of Individual Contributors 

When the Marriott Library website was searched for “cold fusion” and “LENR”, six entries came 
up in addition to the three described above. Because of time limitations, these files were not 
reviewed during the onsite visit. They are presented below (in alphabetical order) with their 
website descriptions. 

6.1 Charles Beaudette :
The Charles G. Beaudette papers (1933-2006) consist of Beaudette’s writings and files on cold fusion. Beaudette 
(b. 1930) is an electrical engineer who graduated from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1952. 

Historical Note: Charles G. Beaudette was born in Boston in 1930. He attended the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology in Cambridge, Massachusetts, where he majored in electrical engineering and held the position of 
managing editor of The Tech, the official student newspaper. He was awarded the degree of S.B. (Bachelor of 
Science) in electrical engineering in 1952, after which he entered a two-year tour of duty in the United States Air 
Force. In 1958 he started Dychro Corporation and sold it to a computer company in 1961. From 1963 to 1973 he 
was employed by EG&G Corporation in Wellesley, Massachusetts, in the capacity of senior engineer and 
engineering manager. It was during this time that he participated in the technology development for what 
eventually became the office facsimile, and which work included development of what is now the PC modem. 
From this activity, Beaudette was issued patents on image processing for variable speed page scanning.  

6.2 John O’M Bockris :
The John O’M. Bockris papers (1923-2013) consists of personal papers, research materials and correspondence. 
Including within the collection are materials regarding the Philadelphia Project and the fraud investigation. 
Bockris was a professor of physical science. 

Historical Note: Bernhardt Patrick John O’Mara Bockris, born 5 January 1923, died 7 July 2013, was a professor 
in the physical sciences. Among wide ranging contributions to physical chemistry, Bockris is best known for his 
creation of physical electrochemistry; for the introduction of a hydrogen economy; and for the first known 
nuclear reactions to be carried out in aqueous solutions. 

Dr. Bockris was exonerated of fraud or scientific misconduct by his university after three investigations of his 
research on cold fusion and transmutation. 

6.3 Talbot Chubb :
The Talbot A. Chubb papers (1930-2011) consist of materials resulting from Chubb’s research interests in cold 
fusion and the physics field. The collection contains his professional writings, presentation materials, proposals, 
and conference materials. Also include in the collection are materials regarding several of his colleagues and also 
subject and organization files. Chubb was an experimental physicist at the Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) in 
Washington, DC. He also researched the theoretical basis of low energy nuclear fusion and the experimental 
evidence of cold fusion. 

Biographical Note: Talbot was born on November 5, 1923 in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, the youngest of three 
sons. He was a physics graduate of Princeton University in 1944. He received a doctorate in physics from the 
University of North Carolina in the early 1950s. 

During World War II, Talbot worked on uranium isotopes for the Manhattan Project at Oak Ridge, TN, and 
served in the US Army. For over 30 years, Talbot was an experimental physicist at the Naval Research 
Laboratory (NRL) in Washington, DC. His research included experiments that examined the earth’s upper 
atmosphere, the sun, and a process for storing energy collected from sunlight, called Solchem. His NRL team 
were pioneers in X-ray astronomy and discovered early evidence of the existence of neutron stars and black 
holes. After retiring from NRL, Talbot worked with his nephew, Scott Chubb, Ph.D., on the theoretical basis of 
low energy nuclear fusion. Recently, his goal was to raise awareness of the experimental evidence of cold fusion 
and to foster research on this new energy source.  

6.4 Craig Hibberd :
The Craig Hibberd collection on cold fusion (1989-1992) contains newspaper and magazine articles about cold 
fusion research conducted by B. Stanley Pons and Martin Fleischman at the University of Utah in 1989. 

Historical Note: Craig Hibberd worked for the Western Area Power Administration. 

6.5 Steven Jones :
The Steven E. Jones papers (1983-1992) consist of materials resulting from Jones’ research interests in cold 
fusion and the physics field in general. Included are correspondence, notes, and writings. 

Historical Note: Steven E. Jones was a professor of physics at Brigham Young University. 

6.6 Michael Melich :
The Michael Melich papers consists of materials regarding his work as a physicist and professor working with 
both the Naval Research Laboratory and the Naval Postgraduate School. The collection consists of 
administrative, research, and lecture materials from his tenure at NPS. 

Biographical Note: Michael Edward Melich was born February 22, 1940, in Moab, Utah, to Mitchell and Doris 
Snyder Melich. He was a dedicated student, and after graduating high school he went on to obtain a B.S. in 
Physics from Stanford, an M.S. in Experimental Physics from the University of Utah, and an M.A. and Ph.D. in 
Theoretical Physics from Rice University. 

From 1967 to 1985 Dr. Melich worked in the command and control section in the Naval Research Laboratory, 
heading it from 1976 to 1985. After this, he took an extended leave of absence to work as the chair professor of 
combat system engineering for the Naval Postgraduate School, where he remained until 2015. While at NPS, he 
was heavily involved in cold fusion research, having taken interest in the field following the 1989 discovery of 
the Pons-Fleischmann Effect at the University of Utah. 

Following an intense battle with prostate cancer, Michael Melich passed away June 28th, 2019. 


7 Project Methods 

As is customary for the LRDI, the methods used were a blend of previously established practice14, 
and procedures specifically for the University of Utah project. The overall LRDI procedure is set 
forth in an article in Infinite Energy15.  

Initially, the Marriott Library website was accessed, and the descriptions of the cold fusion 
holdings were downloaded and examined. Contact was made with Library staff, and arrangements 
were made for the visit. Several days were then spent onsite in Salt Lake City. Photos were taken 
of the library and archive during the visit. As the files were reviewed, selected items were scanned 
using an iPhone scanning app. The general schedule of activities was as follows: 
Day 1 
Orientation. Marriott Library. Photos. ENECO Review 
Day 2 
University Archives. Photos. NCFI Review 
Day 3 
Marriott Library. ENECO Review. 
Day 4 
Marriot Library. Lewenstein Review. Wrapup
 
The March 23, 1989 press conference was downloaded from YouTube and transcribed. 
Screenshots taken of scenes in the video were used to illustrate the two parts of the conference – 
podium/audience and lab tour. A copy of the press release for the conference was also reviewed. 

Supplemental materials on the Web were located, downloaded and incorporated. McKubre’s 
history of the ICCF conferences16 was particularly helpful. The materials from the site visit and 
other sources have been integrated for this report. 


8  Future Opportunities 

Particularly when (and if) the benefits of cold fusion are realized, the trajectory of the field will 
become of great interest. The University of Utah records of the origins of the Fleischmann and 
Pons’ claims will become of paramount importance for documenting this trajectory. 

The primary objectives of the University of Utah Cold Fusion Documentation Project have been to 
describe its cold fusion holdings and to lay the foundation for more detailed work in the future. 
Two possible courses after this Project are to do more in-depth and detailed work with what has 
been documented and to locate additional records elsewhere in the University organization, 
including the original work by Fleischmann and Pons before and after the March 23 
announcement, which was not found in this project.  

Certainly, individual comprehensive projects could be accomplished for the NCFI and 
FEAT/ENECO LENR efforts. Files that were identified in this Project but not included in the 
scope of review could be documented, particularly the files of prominent individuals in the cold 
fusion field. The University archives could be carefully searched for relevant files for additional 
major figures at the organization and in the right timeframe, such as Peterson and Brophy. The 
Department of Chemistry may also have records from the time of Pons’ research and 
chairmanship.  

A more thorough Web search may result in additional information beyond what is available on the 
campus. An idea from the editor of Infinite Energy magazine, Christy Frazier, would be to scan the 
University records for placement on the Web for easy access by historians.  

LRDI participants may be encouraged to contribute their LENR holdings to the Marriott Library 
Collections in a similar way to Beaudette and others.  


Appendix A. Contents of NCFI Records 
“This collection contains budgets, correspondence, legal contracts, memoranda, minutes, news 
articles, reports, and patent applications from the Office of Director of the National Cold Fusion 
Institute. Approximately 1.5 linear feet of the collection comes from the University of Utah 
Technology Transfer Office.” 


Appendix B. Contents of ENECO Categories 3 and 4 
“The ENECO records consist of patents, contracts, research, office, and financial documents 
collected by the company. Included patents are registered by ENECO as well as patents registered 
by outside.” 


B1. Category 3. Research 
Documents in this subseries begin with collected general research (alphabetically organized) and 
the general research binder. These documents are then followed by the articles binder and 
submitted articles. 


B2. Category 3. Personnel Documents
Documents in this series are organized alphabetically by the last name of the individual employee
of ENECO. Individuals included in this series were significant agents of ENECO and its
operations.

