INTRODUCTION

Under the auspices of the Natural Science Foundation of China and the
Science and Technology Commission of China, cold fusion research persists in
China. During the past two years, more than 28 research groups were working
on this fascinating topics. Several hundred man power and about one million
fund were engaged in this controversial research. Having experienced the hot,
quiet, and deep-going phases, we are at the point to review the past and foresee
the future


HOT PHASE 

March 1989 was an unforgettable month in the history of science. The 
aficionados of cold fusion set up quickly the equipments {whatever they had at 
that time) and strived to reproduce the "excess heat" m or "anomalous neutron 
emission". c 2) So many research groups in China were involved that a com­
plete list of them is almost impossible. Because of the difficulties in reproducing 
those sporadic phenomena, only a few groups published their results in the 
newspaper rn and most groups stopped soon after the primary tests. Since the 
conventional fusion theory tells that if the "excess heat" was so large, the 
experimentalist should have been killed by neutron radiation already, people 
would rather believe the neutron emission than the "excess heat". Even the 
emission of neutron was attributed to anomaly or spurious signals, because 
none of existing fusion theory could explain the amount of neutron emission 
and its sporadic nature. Restrained by the conventional theory, people did miss 
some opportunities to have a new discovery. For example, the scientists at 
Southwestern Institute of Nuclear Physics and Chemistry discovered the anom­
alous neutron emission in the discharge tube early in April 19, 1989. C4) They
did not realize that it was a new approach different from Utah's electrolysis ap­
proach or Frascati's gas-loading approach. They recorded 13250 neutron sig­
nals in 45 minutes. The energy of neutron is about 2.2 MeV. When the current 
of discharge increased, this signal increased also. When the current of discharge 
switched off, this signal decayed gradually to the back ground level. When 
palladium electrode was replaced by copper, or zirconium, this neutron signal 
disappeared. The voltage of D.C. discharge is only 4 kV, it is impossible to ex­
plain this neutron emission by beam-target interaction. Particularly, they saw a 
strange bluish glow around the tip of palladium cathode. It is unusual also, 
since the discharge glow in deuterium gas should be rose-like red. Maybe a 
trace of Helium made its unannounced debut in the bluish glow. Half a year 
later, Japanese scientists observed the anomalous neutron emission in an A.C. 
discharge tube also. cs) Now, more scientists in the US, USSR, Japan, India, 
China etc. are using various discharge technique to observe the anomalous nu­
clear effects. It seems that the discharge tube experiment has the highest proba­
bility in repetition, it gives the highest yield of neutron emission along with the 
possible tritium production. Likely, it gives the signal of helium as well. 

Another example was the neutron emission in an ion implantation experi­
ment. c6l May-June, 1989, the fusion scientists at the Southwestern Institute
of Physics observed the neutron emission from a titanium target immerged in 
the plasma of a mirror machine (an experimental device for thermonuclear fu­
sion research). Neutron emission was observed more than four times from a 
negatively biased titanium target (-8kV to -llKV). The burst feature and the 
independence of bias voltage excluded the beam-target model for this neutron 
emission. Two counters, which were located at different distances from the 
titanium target, monitored the neutron emission and recorded the signals 
simultaneously. The counts in the closer counter is higher than that in the far­
ther counter. Both of above-mentioned groups like most of other groups in 
China stopped their experiments unfortunately due to various reasons. The qui­
et period came soon after the Santa Fe workshop in Summer, 1989. 


QUIET PHASE 

'The heart would not stop beating until it reaches "Yellow River "'. This is 
an idiom in long history to describe the Chinese characteristics. While the 
unreproducibility of cold fusion phenomena became a prevailing trend in the 
world, and the hot phase turned into quiet phase; we asked ourselves a 
question: if the cold fusion phenomenon is true, what can we do to verify it. We 
thought of the detection of energetic charged particles in stead of the 
measurement of the "excess heat" or "neutron emission". The energetic charged 
particles are the necessary products of any nuclear reaction, since two charged 
nuclei must produce at least one charged particle after their reaction. On the 
other hand the neutron is not a necessary product of a nuclear reaction. How­
ever there was a good reason for selecting the neutron as an object of 
measurement, because it is easy for neutron to penetrate the electrolyte and the 
vessel. Besides, the chemical method, which was supposed to be used for tritium 
detection, is not as sensitive as nuclear method for neutron detection. It was a 
reasonable choice to detect the neutron for nuclear effects, although it requires 
a set of sophisticated instruments and advanced technology. However, based on 
the Frascati invention of gas-loading experiment, Tsinghua University team 
proposed to use CR-39 (plastic track detector) to detect the energetic chaued 
particles. CR-39 has high sensitivity and low background. CR-39 needs not 
any high voltage power supply; therefore, it has low electronic noise and is par­
ticularly suitable for Frascati type experiments in the high pressure vessel.  CR-39 has no dead time and has high efficiency; hence, it is good for the 
measurement of bursts. By fortune, it turned out that the yield of tritium was 
much higher than that of neutron. Consequently, we had better chance in detec­
tion of any anomalous nuclear effects. c 7) Fig.1 is a typical photo of the CR-39 detector exposed in a Frascati type experiment using the palladium foil 
imported from Russia in 1950's. In addition, we proposed the idea of "precur­
sor of the cold fusion". c B) We believe that before the emission of nuclear 
products there must be some electromagnetic radiations due to the transition of 
the electrons from states to states. If we could find the correlation between these 
precursor (electromagnetic radiations) and the nuclear products, we might en­
hance the reliability of the measurement and improve the reproducibility.  Thermoluminescence detector was proposed to detect those electromagnetic ra­
diations. We did observe some positive results of this precursor. 

In the same time, international collaboration was developed between Los 
Alamos Lab. in US and the Institute of Atomic Energy in China. Frascati type 
experiment was reproduced in China using US instruments and samples. The 
technique for treatment of sample was studied there also. 

Professor Guo at Chengdu University of Science and Technology proposed 
a model for cold fusion phenomena and suggested to measure the "excess heat" 
and helium-4. Thermal couples, which were buried in the titanium or 
palladium electrode, were used to monitor the "excess heat". A series of anoma­
lous jumps in the readings of thermal couple were recorded. 


DEEP-GOING PHASE 

The conferences in 1990 ( I Annual Conference on Cold Fusion at Salt 
Lake City in March, The National Symposium on Cold Fusion at Beijing in 
May, The International Progress View on the Anomalous Nuclear Effect in 
Deuterium / Solid System at Provo in October ) promoted the research for­
ward continuously. After the DOE blue cover report c 9, more and more reproducible experimental results were published. Particularly, the detections of 
random neutron emission and the neutron bursts from the gas-loading 
(Frascati type) titanium samples are getting better and better. In the coal mine, 
600 m. deep underground, the. team of Institute of Atomic Energy still detected 
the random neutron emission and neutron bursts using the same He-3 
detectors as that at Los Alamos Lab. Having improved the treatment of Ti 
samples, they have obtained even higher repetition rate and higher intensity of 
burst. This eliminates the suspicion of cosmic-ray-induced bursts. In addition, 
they further studied the cooling effect on the helium-3 proportional counter. 

They found that cooling by liquid nitrogen might have caused some spurious 
signals like the neutron bursts,but it only happened under the condition that the 
cooling effect should have been so strong that it had been far beyond the range 
of interest. In positive side, they forged the Ti sample and obtained much higher 
burst intensity with even higher repetition rate; they measured the time-behav­
ior of the neutrons in each burst in order to compare with the calculation using 
Fermi age theory of neutron diffusion in a slowing-down medium. 

The team at Beijing Normal University, who first obtained a neutron spec­
trum from electrolytic cell early in 1989, continued their study in various meth­
ods ( electrolyzing, gas-loading, A.C. gas discharging etc.). They have used 
CR-39 for detection of charged particles also. CR-39 plastic track detector be­
comes a very popular tool now in China. It is not only used by the above-men­
tioned team, but also by other teams at the University of Science and Technol­
ogy of China, at the Beijing Institute of Physics, etc. The latter two teams used 
CR-39 in gas-discharge tube experiments. The team of the University of Sci­
ence and Technology of China found reproducible emission of energetic char­
ged particles near the palladium cathode rod. The team of the Beijing Institute 
of physics found the correlation between the bluish light and the anomalous nu­
clear radiation in the discharge tube. 

Tsinghua University team is heading towards two goals: (1) using energetic 
charged particles as an object to study the anomalous nuclear effects; (2) using 
precursor to improve the reliability and reproducibility. Some progresses have 
been made in identifying the tracks of energetic charged particles in CR-39. Us­
ing standard alpha particle sources ( Cf-252 and Am-241 ), we carefully cali­
brated the CR-39 in collaboration with the scientists at Institute of High Ener­
gy Physics. c to) The primary results indicate that the energy of the charged
particles may be higher than 5 MeV, and the number of charge may be higher 
than or equal to 2. An international collaboration between the Tsinghua Uni-
versity team and the scientists from the National Cold Fusion Institute at Salt 
Lake City is being arranged for joint research on the identification of these 
tracks. 

A new setup has been developed at the Institute of Nuclear Energy and 
Technology at Tsinghua University to search for precursor in real time. cm A special gold-silicon surface barrier detector is used in gas-loading experiments 
(Frascati type) to detect both the electromagnetic radiations and charged parti­
cles. As expected, the low energy radiations appear as a burst in company with 
the emission of energetic charged particles. Surprisingly enough, the energy of 
these charged particles are mostly higher than 5MeV as well. The number of 
these charged particles are close to the number of tracks in CR-39 (several 
hundreds per cm2 per day). There are two points revealed by this setup of ex­
periment: (1) The energy of the charged particles becomes lower and distributes 
wider, when the temperature cycle runs once and once again. It implies that 
those charged particles may be emitted in the layer deeper and deeper under the 
palladium surface; (2) Twenty days after the experiment, the palladium foil 
keeps emitting the energetic charged particles even in the air. It might imply that 
the palladium be activated after the gas-loading experiment. 

Tsinghua University team has used the CR-39 technique to scrutinize a 
variety of materials for cold fusion research c 12) • Different materials such as
palladium from USA, Russia, and from different sources in China; pure 
titanium (in porous state), titanium alloys (e.g. V6-Al6-Sn2 etc.); zirconium; 
nickel; lanthanum; and hydrogen-storage materials (e.g. LaNi5) are tested us­
ing CR-39. Primary results show that: Among the various palladium foils 
Russian palladium foil imported in 1950's gives the highest yield of charged 
particles (greater than 103 I cm2 • day). The titanium alloy (Ti-662) is not as 
good as Russian palladium (about several hundred tracks per cm2 per day), but 
it still has high repetition rate. The other materials give no evident signal dis­
tinct from background, which is less than 10 tracks per cm2 per day. The yield 
becomes less and less after the first usage in the gas-loading experiment. 


CONCLUDING REMARK 

The detection of energetic charged particles has been proved to be a good 
approach in searching the anomalous nuclear effects. As long as we can identify 
the existence of energetic charged particles, there will be no doubt about the nu­
clear effects. The experiments abroad cm and inland have shown that certain 
deuterium/ solid system does emit the energetic charged particles. This is the 
first anomaly-nuclear reaction at room temperature. 

All these positive experiments showed that the energy of these charged par­
ticles may be greater than 5MeV, and some of their charge number is definitely 
greater than 1. This is the second anomaly-branch ratio is different from that 
of conventional D-D reaction. 

It seems that the charge number of these charged particle might be greater 
than 2. This would radically change the whole picture of the reaction, since 
D-D reaction could not produce any charged particle with charge number
greater than 2. This would be the third anomaly-palladium or titanium might
be no longer a bystander but a participant of the reaction. In fact the experi­
ment at Naval Research Lab. has indicated the anomalous enrichment of  106P during electrolysis C14l is another evidence of this third anomaly.

If the above-mentioned three anomalies are true; then one may ask how 
the coulomb barrier of Pd is penetrated? It is reasonable to think of the neutral 
unknown particles. Professor Yang of the Hunan Normal University proposed 
the bi-neutron as a candidate for this unknown neutral particle. In fact other 
foreign scientists had made similar suggestions also early in 1990 ml . I would 
like to draw the attention to a Chinese experiment, which indicated the exist­ence of bineutron state. 06l 

After two year struggle, now it is the time to be respectful to the new facts 
and to renew our mind. A window has been opened towards the back yard of 
the physics. A rose is there, although it is thorny. 


REFERENCES 

( 1) M. Fleischmann, S. Pons and M. Hawkins, J. Electroanal. Chem. 261
( 1989 ) 301.
( 2) S. E. Jones, et al. Nature 338 ( 1989 ) 737.
( 3) CHINA DAILY. April 24, 1989, P. 1.
( 4) R. H. Xiong, et al. "Experimental Studies on Cold Fusion Using Ionized
Deuterium Gas ", Proceedings of National Symposium on Cold Fusion
( May 10, 1990. Beijing )
( 5) N. Wada and K. Nishizawa, Japanese Journal of Applied Physics. 28
( 1989 ) , 2017.
( 6) S. Y. Duang, et al. "Cold Fusion Phenomena in a Mirror Confined
Plasma", Proceedings of National Symposium on Cold Fusion ( May 10,
1990, Beijing ).
( 7) Tsinghua University team, "Search for Precursor of the Cold Fusion
Phenomena", Ibid.
( 8) X. Z. Li, et al. " Precursor of the Cold Fusion Phenomena in
Deuterium/ Solid System" , Proceedings of the Progress View of the
Anomalous Nuclear Effect in Deuterium/ Solid System, October 21-24,
1990, Provo, USA.
( 9) DOE/ S---0073, "Cold Fusion Research" , A report of the Energy Re­
search Advisory Board to the United States Department of Energy, Nov.,
(10) S. C. Wang, et al, "Identification of the Energetic Charged Particles in
Gas-Loading Experiment of 'Cold Fusion' Using CR-39 Plastic Track
Detector". This Meeting.
(11) D. ·W. Mo, et al, "Search for Precursor and Charged Particles in 'Cold
Fusion'". This Meeting.
(12) K. L. Wang, et al, "Search for the Better Material for 'Cold Fusion' Us­
ing CR-39". This Meeting.
(13) S. E. Jones, Private Communication, Dec. 1990.
(14) D. R. Rolison and W. E. O'Grady, Proc. NSF/ EPRI Workshop
(15) G. Andermann, "A New Theoretical Model ( Nu-Q •) for Rationalizing
Various Events of 'Cold Fusion' in Deuterium Loaded Palladium Cath-
odes" , Proceedings of the First Annual Conference on Cold Fusion, 
March 28-31, 1990, Salt Lake City, USA, P. 295. 
(16) Y. Q. Zhang, et al, " 2H ( d, 2He ) 2n Reaction Induced by 15. 7 Me V
Deuteron" Scientia Sinica, A, ( 1987 ), 286.

Fig. I A typical picture for the signals of energetic charged particles in CR-39 
