1. Experimental 

The experimental layout consists of a small (8.5 cm3) electrolytic cell with an anode made 
of a Platinum sheet and a cathode made of a Pd stripe sputtered on an inert surface. The cell 
is filled with 5.5 ml of 10-4 M LiOD solution. Electrolytic currents in the range 2 - 10 mA 
were used to load Deuterium into the Palladium lattice. The cell is equipped with a Peltier 
element in good thermal contact with the Pd cathode in order to record a possible unbalance 
between the power electrically dissipated into the cell and the power detected. A detailed 
description of the experimental layout and of the cathode loading technique has been given 
elsewhere [5], [6]. 

The gas mixture evolving from the cell contains mainly O2 and D2 with a very small 
amount of 4He. In such conditions the helium analysis by mass spectrometry has posed 
numerous special problems. The risk of contamination, too, has required special care. To 
overcome these problems, an innovative “pseudo-static” gas analysis method has been 
developed. Non evaporable getter (NEG) pumps remove effectively all the non inert 
components of the gas mixture (especially hydrogen isotopes), whereas noble gases remain in 
the gas phase. This technique allows us to analyze easily the content of inert gases in the 
sample as well as to monitor for contamination by comparing the time evolution of different 
noble gases. We have found it is necessary to avoid cryosorption pumps, as they trap helium 
erratically in the condensates. 

Furthermore, the particular arrangement used in our experiments allows us to sample 
periodically the gas during the loading phase, without perturbing the electrolytic process at 
all. 

During the measurement, the gas is periodically sampled (at about 40 minute intervals), 
without influencing the electrolytic process, and sent to a Quadrupole Mass Analyser 
(QMA); this allows us to check in real-time the 4He content of the electrolytic cell.  

In order to have a reference value (a blank experiment) we started the electrolysis 
keeping the electrolytic current to a very low value (2 - 4 mA) for some hours leaving thus 
the D/Pd systems “under-critical” at x < 1. We  then increased the cell current and 
consequently the longitudinal voltage, to about 20 Volts. The R/R0 ratio fell below the value 

1.3. That corresponds, according to the well known R/R0 vs. x curve, to x=1. That, and the :
excess heat detected in the calorimeter within its response time, signal the onset of the 
phenomenon. Since we are able now to count the 4He atoms over intervals as short as 40 
minutes we can check the coincidence of excess heat production and 4He generation. 


2. Results 

During a typical experiment we can distinguish four phases (see Fig.1):  

Preloading phase. During this normal electrolysis phase, the output power Pout 
coincides with the power Pin supplied by the electrolytic current, the number of 4He atoms is 
compatible with the background value of the detector. At this time the cold fusion 
phenomenon is absent and these measurements exclude the existence of systematic errors or 
artefacts. 

Loading phase. The application of an electrical potential across the cathode makes 
possible to increase the Deuterium loading over the threshold necessary to observe the 
phenomenon. 

Supercritical phase. Upon crossing this threshold, “anomalies” appear in the 
system, namely: a) the temperature of the cathode increases above the previous equilibrium 
value, signalling a source of enthalpy in the cell; b) a significant deviation of 4He from the 
baseline is observed from this time onwards 

Control phase. After some hours of cell operation, the cathode potential Vc is 
switched off: both anomalies a) and b) disappear. 4He yield settles back to the initial zero 
value, excluding that leakages or permeations have occurred.  


3. Conclusions 

We have observed 4He production during electrolysis in LiOD solution on a Palladium 
cathode a factor of about 60 times out of the baseline. Simultaneously, an anomalous 
enhancement of the temperature measured in the cell was detected. Our calorimetric 
technique (measuring the average cathode temperature measurement) requires that the system 
be at thermal equilibrium (or in a succession of thermal equilibrium states). Non thermal 
(radiative) part of the energy produced in the phenomenon will not be accounted for by the 
temperature transducer (the Peltier element) if it thermalises out of the cell. Thus, we are able 
to estimate, at the present time, a lower bound for the produced energy. 

The experiments performed so far suggest the following conclusions: 

1. The reported production of excess heat and helium demand the overcoming of a 
critical threshold of D concentration in Pd. 

2. The demonstration of the presence of 4He provides evidence that a nuclear 
process occurred in the cell; a nuclear reaction is therefore obtainable by 
chemical procedures. 

3. Thermal calorimetry can demonstrate the presence of a small amount of excess 
heat although the only high precision  calorimetry would be based on a 
quantitative evaluation of the  4He. 

The above results fit quite well into the theoretical proposal  based on standard 
Quantum Electrodynamics (QED) [7]. We summarize here its main predictions:   

1. when the stoichiometric ratio x = D/Pd exceeds 0.7 (at room temperature) D 
nuclei (deuterons) enter a stationary coherent oscillatory state, whose phase 
is sharply defined. This state is described by a unique wave function and is 
able to respond to externally applied electric potentials (and not only to their 
gradients). 

2. when x exceeds 1, the probability that oscillating deuterons reach a distance 
that might allow the fusion becomes appreciable. As a matter of fact this 
threshold is not easily reached and this accounts for many of the failures in 
trying to reproduce the effect. 

3. the fusion among deuterons occurs in a plasma within a medium and not in 
vacuo. Thus energy and momentum can be shared among many components 
of the condensed system, allowing in principle a fast cooling of the “hot” D-
D compound nucleus preventing its splitting. Consequently 4He should be 
expected to be the final product of this newly discovered nuclear fusion.  

In the next stage of the experiments we will try to address the difficulties of thermal 
calorimetry with the aim of capturing a larger fraction of the excess enthalpy as indicated by 
the “helium” calorimetry. 


References 

1.  McKUBRE et. al, Proc. Of Third International Conference on Cold Fusion, “Frontiers of Cold fusion”, 
Nagoya, Japan: Universal Academy Press, Inc. Tokyo, Japan 1: p.5 (1992) 
2. Y. ISOBE, K. YABUTA, S. UEDA, A. TAKAHASHI,  Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., Vol.41 pp.866-870,(2002) 
3. Y. ARATA, H. FUJITA, Y. ZHANG, Proc. Of The Japan Academy, vol.78, Ser. B, No. 7 (2002) 
4. T. BRESSANI, E. DEL GIUDICE, G. PREPARATA, Nuovo Cim. 101A,  845,(1989) 
5.] A. DE NINNO, A. FRATTOLILLO, A. RIZZO, E. DEL GIUDICE, Proc. Of  ICCF9, Beijing 2002, p. 
6. A. DE NINNO, A. FRATTOLILLO, A. RIZZO, E. DEL GIUDICE, G. PREPARATA, ENEA Technical 
Report, RT-2002/41/FUS 
7. G. PREPARATA, “QED Coherence in Matter”, World Scientific, Singapore 1995, Ch. 8 

Figure  1 (a) 4He content of the gas mixture inside the storage volume, (b) excess power PHe derived from 
helium yield assuming that  24 MeV are released for each helium atom and (c) average excess 
calorimetric power PC in the experiment described in the text. The data are shown as a function of 
time allowing to check the coincidence.  
