INTRODUCTION

Fleischmann, Pons and Hawkins (1) and Jones et al. (2) have reported evidence for
nuclear fusion of deuterium electro-chemically injected into palladium. Excess heat
generation, neutron and γ-rays emission and tritium enhancement (1) were found by the
first group and neutron emission (2) by the second group. These results have been met
with much skepticism, especially after several reports of negative results by other
workers (3-5). Subsequently there have been a number of reports of excess heat
generation (6-8) and tritium enhancement (9, 10) or both (11)

The present research was motivated by the necessity for experiments under well
defined conditions. In order to verify excess heat generation calorimetric measurements
were done with a modified (Fleischmann-Pons) type open cell and calorimetric
measurements with a closed cell with internal D2/O2 recombination. Some excess heat
generation was observed. The results, however, require further evaluation and will be
reported at a future date. Careful determination of tritium was done in electrolytic
solution and also in the water obtained from the recombined gases outside the cell.
Surface analysis of Pd cathode was performed and the D/Pd ratio determined. Neutron
radiation measurements were attempted, but difficulties in making background
corrections interfered with the interpretation.


EXPERIMENTAL

Electrodes
Pd from several sources was used for cathodes. The rods 0.2 × 10 cm were obtained
from Engelhard Corporation. Wire of 0.5 mm diameter and 99.9% purity, was obtained
from Johnson Matthey - Aesar. 1 mm wire (grade A) and 4 mm rod of 99.9% purity were
obtained from Johnson-Matthey, England. The Engelhard Pd was also used by
Westinghouse to prepare 2 mm rods by recasting, drawing or swaging. The pretreatments used with various samples are indicated in the tables.
Anodes were made of Engelhard's Pt ribbon or wire cages of 99.9% purity Pt or Ni foil
(99.9%), obtained from Fischer Scientific Co.

Electrolytes
0.1 M LiOD was used as the electrolyte in all glass cells, while 0.1 M and 1 M LiOD
were used in Ni encased cells. LiOD attacks glass, which leads to a deposition of Si and
other constituents of glass onto the Pd. The SIMS measurements showed that even in 0.1
M LiOD after several weeks Si could be easily detected on the Pd surface. The
electrolytes were prepared from once distilled Norell (99.5%) or Isotech (99.9%) D2O.
1 M LiOD was prepared from Li20 (99.9%) Cerac, Inc. in a glove bag. Upon diluting this
stock solution, 0.1 M LiOD was obtained. Time constants did not permit yet to run blank
experiments with LiOH electrolyte solution.

Tritium Measurements
The analyses of the solution for tritium were performed by Westinghouse Electric
Company using liquid scintillation counting on a Packard 4030 counter. The liquid
scintillation cocktails were prepared with OPTI-FLOUR scintillator. Typically, four
consecutive 60 min. counts were recorded and averaged. Another precaution against any
possible complications caused by components in the electrolyte solution was a vacuum
distillation of the solution before tritium measurements. While this procedure minimized
the possibility of interference effects with some constituents of the electrolyte it causes
some loss of dissolved T2 and DT. For this reason some experiments were done without
distillation after neutralization of the alkaline electrolyte. The electrolytic solution from
the cells with Ni anodes was neutralized, filtered and centrifuged to remove suspended
nickel oxide particles. Distillation was also used with a centrifuged sample which showed
high counts in order to ensure that solid particles within the electrolytic solution were not
responsible for the high count rate.

Neutron Radiation Measurements
The neutron detection was attempted by using two BF3 counters coupled with a
multichannel analyzer. The authors are not satisfied that the background was adequately
taken into account with this experimental arrangement and hence the results are
considered inconclusive. Solid state track recorders may prove attractive for the
measurements in the future.


RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Tritium
Fleischmann and Pons (1) reported enhancement of tritium concentration in the
electrolyte as one evidence for a cold fusion of deuterium. The enhancement factor (see
Eq. 4) is, however, close to the deuterium/tritium separation SD,T ≈ 2, as recently
determined by Corrigan and Schneider (12). Bockris et al. (13) and Wolf et al. (14)
reported recently enhancements of 4 to 7 orders of magnitude over the background. In
this work we have measured tritium concentrations in open F-P cells, closed cells with
the Ni casing and in four open cells designed for studying the tritium enhancement.

In open cells a change in tritium concentration will occur due to the addition of D2O
containing T and due to removal by electrolysis. The isotopic separation factor of T to D
is defined as S = (nD/nT)g/(nD/nT)s
where nD and nT are numbers of deuterium and tritium atoms in the gas (g) and the
solution (s) phases
It can be shown (14) that the enhancement of tritium in a cell at time (t) obeys the
following expression nT(t)/nT(o) - S-(S-1)exp(-t/T)
Thus, at very long times the tritium concentration in the solution due to isotopic
separation is S times the tritium concentration in the original solution.

If the recombination of D2 and O2 is carried out in the cell or outside the cell and the
D2O returned to the cell, the change in tritium concentration in the electrolyte could be
brought about either by having substantial tritium in the palladium or other cell
components or by a nuclear reaction. The palladium was stripped of hydrogen and its
isotopes by electrochemical oxidation for 24 h in LiOD solution. This treatment has
removed any tritium that might possibly be present in the Pd samples.

In all our experiments, in which an enhancement of T was observed, a long time
electrolysis of the order of several weeks was necessary before observation of the
increase in tritium concentration. In two open cells with Pt anodes excess tritium was
found. These cells also were the only ones out of five which generated excess heat.

Table 1 gives the cell parameters for which enhancement of tritium concentration was
observed. In four open cells, which were designed to study tritium accumulation and
generation, were essentially test tubes 3 cm in diameter with a Teflon cell top. Cathodes
were 5 cm long, spot welded to a nickel ribbon as an electrical contact; 0.25 cm thick Ni
foil was used as anode. During a long term electrolysis a black residue, most probably
nickel oxide, accumulated in the electrolyte in only two cells. The electrolyte was filtered
and centrifuged to remove these particles and then neutralized by HCl before
determination of T. When large tritium counts the solution was distilled and counted
again. In some instances (cells 1, 2) the solution was vacuum distilled and only the distillate was added to the scintillating liquid to avoid possible complications with
various species in the solution.

The results are given in Table 2. All measurements were done in four runs during
several to 24 h. The average of 4 counts is given with the standard deviation indicated.
The decrease in the count rates for the distilled vs. neutralized samples was negligible.
The samples were taken in intervals of 15-20 days. According to Bockris et al. (13) after
reaching the maximum level, the tritium content considerably decreases after a few days,
eventually down to the separation factor. If this is applicable to our measurements, it may
mean that we have not observed the maximum amount of tritium probably due to a low
frequency of sampling. The calculation of the tritium concentration was done in the
following way:

The number of disintegrations per minute per ml was calculated by dividing the net
count rate with the efficiency factor, which is 0.224 c/d for this instrument. For cells number 1 and 2 for which some excess heat generation was observed, the
tritium level amounted to 766.43 and 1730 dpm ml-1
respectively. *

Let us compare the excess heat generated in these open cells with the amount of T
found. If all of the energy were coming from the tritium generating reaction, D + D → T + H + 4.03 MeV (6)
this would produce 4.03 MeV = 4.03 • 106
eV • 1.6022 • 10-19J/eV - 6.46 • 10-13
J/reaction.
If 1 mW of power is produced in a cold fusion reaction, per 1 cm3
of Pd the
corresponding number of T atoms would be 10-3 W/(6.46 × 1013 W s/reaction) = 1.55 ×
109
reactions/s; i.e. 1.55 × 109
T atoms would need to be produced. Tritium decays by the
reaction T → 3He + β- + ν-
where β- is a beta particle and ν- is a antineutrino. Tritium decay is, as with all radioactive
nuclei, first order. For N atoms of T, the decay rate is 
The decay constant, related to the half life, is (17)
λ = 1.782 × 10-19 s-1

Therefore, the observed 766 and 1730 dpm ml-1
can account only for ~4-10 mW. Much
smaller, but still significant, enhancement of tritium was found in the gas phase for cells
1 and 4 after recombination of O2 with D2 and TD. Based on the separation factor one
would expect a lower concentration of tritium in the gas phase, if tritium originates from
the solution phase. Smaller concentrations of T in the gas phase than in the liquid phase
were found by Bockris et al. (13) for long electrolysis times. In certain short intervals,
e.g., one day, however, a higher concentration in gas phase was observed. The frequency
of our measurements was not sufficient to detect such short-lived changes.

In an experiment of this importance one should address the question of the
contamination by T of materials used in the experiments. The question can be ruled out
on the grounds that the same materials have been used for the cells that gave zero tritium
enhancement and the necessity for the long charging of Pd before observation of T.
Electrochemical oxidation of H, D, or T, annealing and catalytic combustion, during the
pretreatment make unlikely the possibility that tritium came from the palladium samples
contaminated by tritium before the experiments.


Coulometric Determination of D absorbed in Pd Cathodes
Metallic Pd can absorb D to form a solid PdDx solution. For cathodes equilibrated with
air at ambient temperature and pressure, a value of x of about 0.7 to 0.8 is widely
accepted. The reactivity of D in Pd may vary considerably with x, particularly if x
exceeds 0.8, and therefore a coulometric determination of x was made. The working
electrode was a coil of Pd wire (diameter = 0.025 cm, area =1.86 cm2
, mass = 0.12 g;
99.997%, Puratronic grade, Johnson Matthey) crimped together with the end of a gold
wire (d = 0.05 cm; 99.9985%, Puratronic, Johnson Matthey) which served as the lead to
the potentiostat. A three compartment electrochemical cell was used. The electrolyte, 0.1
M LiOD was continuously and vigorously degassed with N2 (99.995%, Ultrapure,
Matheson). The counter electrode, a Pd coil (A = 2 cm2
), was in a chamber connected to
the working chamber by a glass tube filled with a glass wool plug. The reference
electrode was a reversible deuterium electrode (RDE).

The working electrode was rinsed with 0.1 M LiOD and D2O electrolyte solution and
cycled between 0.25 and 1.35 V until the steady state voltammogram shown in Fig. 1
(dashed line) was obtained. The cell was then rinsed and refilled with fresh electrolyte
solution and sparged with N2 gas. When the cell was left at open circuit for several days,
it came to rest at +0.83 V, and it always returned to +0.83 V at open circuit whether it
was offset to positive or negative potentials. When the working electrode was potentiostated at 0.83 V, no current flowed.

Figure 2 shows the chronoamperometry curves for the charging of Pd with D at -0.3 V
and discharging of D from Pd at +0.83 V. During the charging at -0.3 V, there was no
noticeable D2 gas evolution at the working electrode. This suggests that when D is
formed on the Pd surface at -0.3 V, initially most of the D is absorbed into the bulk Pd.
During charging at -0.3 V, the magnitude of the current was ~10 mA in the first minute,
gradually dropped to ~1.5 mA after 10 hours, and finally stabilized at ~0.7 mA after 1
day.

There is an inflection in the chronocoulometry charging curve at ~0.3 V (Fig. 1, bottom
curve) after 10 h. It was also noticed that after 10 or more hours that if the N2 bubbler
was lifted over the electrolyte solution, D2 bubbles were visible and slowly nucleating at
the Pd surface. These observations suggest that after 10 h the charging of the Pd with D is
nearly completed. The linear diffusion law is stated as, <x>2
= 2 D t, with <x> being the
mean distance traveled in time, t, with diffusion coefficient, D. An effective diffusion
coefficient of D through Pd for the charging process, Dcharging, can be calculated by using
t = 10 hours and <x> = 0.0125 cm (the radius of the electrode), and the value for Dcharging
is ~2 × 10-9 cm2 s-l. The transport of D into Pd wire is more complicated than that
represented by simple linear diffusion because during D loading the electrode would be
modeled better as a cylinder which is slowly expanding.

The endpoint of the charging process was difficult to assign since PdDx formation and
D2 evolution can occur simultaneously as discussed above. The discharging process at
+0.83 V was easily spotted because the current goes to zero when discharge is complete.
Although the charging of D into Pd (bottom curves in Figs. 1 and 2) took over 10 h,
discharging of D from Pd at +0.83 V (see top curves in Figs. 1 and 2) was completed
after ~70 minutes. Using the linear diffusion law, this endpoint suggests an effective
diffusion coefficient for discharging D from Pd, Ddischarging, of ~2 × 10-8 cm2s1. One
analogous feature in the discharge chronoamperometry curve, not noticeable in Fig. 1, is
a sinusoidal ripple in the curve between 1 1/2 and 8 minutes. This ripple is possibly due
to a sudden phase transition in the cathode from the α to β phase as it loses ~40% of the
total 106.5 C of charge in this time interval.

Several other charging potentials were tried, but the optimal charging potential was
~ -0.3 V vs. RDE. The rate of charging Pd with D was impractically slow at lower
overpotentials (i.e., potentials more positive than -0.25 V). On the other hand, the rate of
charging Pd with D was not noticeably increased at greater overpotentials (i.e., more
negative than -0.3 V), although the rate of D2 evolution did appear to increase with
increasing overpotential. Figure 6 shows the chronocoulometry curve for loading D into
Pd at -0.35 V (see bottom curve). Comparing this and the analogous curve in Fig. 7 for
loading at -0.3 V, one can see that at any given time there was more total negative charge
for the loading of -0.35 V versus at -0.3 V. Furthermore, even though the total charge
collected at -0.35 V (-255 C) was greater than the total charge collected at -0.3 V (-142
C), both experiments gave roughly the same total value for discharge at +0.83 V, namely
+107 C. Similarly, the total charge collected at -0.4 V was -289 C (and was accompanied
by even stronger D2 bubble evolution), but still discharging the Pd cathode loaded this
way gave just +122 C.

The mass of the Pd in the electrode was 0.12 g which corresponds to 1.1 × 10-3 moles
of Pd. Assuming that the positive charge collected at +0.83 V is due only to the discharge
of D from Pd, the moles of D in Pd can be calculated from Faraday's law, moles(D) =Q(discharge)/nF, in which n is 1 for the discharge of 1 D from Pd and F is Faraday's
constant (9.65 × 104 C/equivalent). The results are summarized in Table 3. All three cases
indicate that there was one D absorbed per Pd atom in the electrode over this range of
loading potentials with 0.1 M LiOD and D2O as the electrolyte solution.

The loading and discharging processes were essentially reversible when the loading
potentials were more positive than -0.4 V. When larger overpotentials, e.g., -0.6 V vs.
RDE, were used the value of the subsequent discharge fell to ~+90 C, i.e., the
corresponding ratio of D to Pd in the charged electrode was ~0.8. This suggests that
charging Pd cathodes at high over-potentials (or alternatively at high constant currents)
may result in irreversible damage to the electrode, which may prevent attaining higher
ratios of D to Pd.


GENERAL DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

The results reported here support, to a certain extent, the claims of tritium generated in
the electrolysis of D2O on Pd of deuterium reported by Fleischmann, Pons and Hawkins
(1). The following conclusions have been reached:
1. Enhancement of tritium was found in two out of five open cells with Pt-anodes and
four out of four cells with Ni-anodes. The largest enhancement factor with respect to
D2O is ~50. The heat level is by three orders of magnitude larger than the heat
corresponding to the observed tritium levels.
2. The ratio of deuterium to palladium atoms was found to be 1 for 0.25 mm wire,
charged at E = -0.3 - 0.65 V.
3. The neutron radiation measurements were inconclusive due to the uncertainty in
determining the background correction.

In general, on the experimental side there are, however, many questions to be answered
in order to increase the understanding of this phenomenon. These include the
irreproducibility and sporadicity of the phenomenon, necessity for a prolonged
electrolysis before the excess heat or tritium production occur, the role of the
microstructure and of the trace impurities in palladium, the difference between the
amount of excess heat in open and closed cell, the role of surface impurities and the role
of lithium, if any.

On the theoretical side the questions appear even more difficult. Table 4 lists possible
fusion reaction of deuterium. According to the accepted theories the evidence for fusion
of deuterium requires, besides the heat generation, a corresponding amount of neutrons,
tritium and 3He. The branching ratio of reaction A and B (Table 3) is approximately one.
The cross section for reaction C is on the order of 107
lower than for A and B (1). γ-rays
should be observed if the reaction C occurs in the electrochemical cell.

No data on electrochemically induced fusion satisfies indisputably any of these
requirements. In order to overcome these difficulties several new mechanisms of fusion
have been proposed. These include the mechanisms in which the energy from the reaction
C dissipates into the lattice as heat rather than γ-photon (17, 18), or in which two
deuterons as bosons are squeezed together in a sphere of an octahedral site (19).
Dendrites on Pd surface have been suggested as an explanation for tritium generation,
due to increased electric fields around the dendrite tips (13). Fracto-fusion was also
mentioned as a possible explanation in analogy with the explanation of neutron
generation upon fracturing LiD single crystals (19). There is, obviously, a need for more
work in order to estimate the merits of these explanations, as well as reach a complete
understanding of the Fleischmann and Pons phenomenon.


REFERENCES

1. M. Fleischmann, S. Pons and M. Hawkins, J. Electroanol. Chem 261 (1989) and
Errata 263 (1989) 187.
2. S. E. Jones, E. P. Palmer, J. B. Czirr, D. L. Decfer, G. L. Jensen, J. Thorne and S. F.
Taylor, Nature, 338, 737 (1989).
3. M. Goi, S. L. Rugori, R. H. France, B. J. Lund, Z. Zhao, A. J. Davenport, H. S. Isaacs
and K. G. Lyun, Nature, 340, 29 (1989).
4. N. S. Lewis, et al. Nature, 340, 525 (1989).
5. D. E. Williams, D. J. S. Findley, D. H. Creston, M. R. Sene', M. Bailey, S. Croft, B.
W. Hooton, C. P. Jones, A. R. J. Kucernak, J. A. Mason and R. I. Taylor, Nature, 342,
375 (1989).
6. A. J. Appleby, S. Srinivasan, O. J. Murphy and C. R. Martin, Workshop on Cold
Fusion Phenomena, Sante Fe, May 22-25, 1989.
7. R. A. Huggins, Workshop on Cold Fusion Phenomena, Santa Fe, May 22-25, 1989.
8. R. A. Oriani, J. C. Nelson, S. K. Lee and J. H. Broadhurst, The Electrochemical
Society Meeting, October, 16-20, 1989, Hollywood, Florida.
9. N. J. C. Packham, K. L. Wolf, J. C. Wass, R. C. Kainthle and J. O'M. Bockris, J.
Electroanal. Chem., 270, 451 (1989).
10. P. K. Iyengar, Fifth International Conference on Emerging Nuclear Energy Systems
(ICENESV) Karlsruhe, West Germany, July 1989.
11. U. Landau, The Electrochemical Society Meetings, October 16-20 Hollywood,
Florida.
12. D. A. Corrigan and E. W. Schneider, submitted to J. Electroanol. Chem.
13. G. H. Lin, R. C. Kainthle, N. J. C. Packham, O. Velev and J. O'M. Bockris, p. 3.
Manuscript submitted to J. Electrochem. Soc.
14. K. L. Wolf, N. J. C. Packham, D. L. Lawson, J. Shoemaker, F. Cheng and J. C. Wass,
Manuscript submitted to J. Fusion Energy.
15. D. Albolgi, R. Ballinger, V. Commoroto, X. Chen, R. Crooks, C. Fiore, M. Gaudreau,
I. Hwang, C. K. Li, P. Linsay, S. Luekhardt, R. R. Parker, R. Petrasso, M. Schoh, K.
Wenzel and M. Wrighton Manuscript submitted to the Journal of Fusion Energy.
16. P. Clark Souers, Hydrogen Properties for Fusion, Energy, University of California,
Berkely 1986.
17. P. L. Hagelstein, Proc. of the Cold Fusion Workshop, J. Fusion Energy, in press.
18. J. Rafelski, M. Gaide, D. Harley and S. E. Jones, Unpublished results.
19. B. V. Deryagin, V. A. Klyuev, A. G. Lipson and Yu. T. Toporov, Kolloiidnyi
Zhurnal, 48, 12 (1986).



