NUCLEAR REACTIONS IN CONDENSED MEDIA AND X-RAY
Vitaliy Romodanov A .• Valeriy Savin I. ,*Yakov Skuratnik B .•
tdtMichael Yuriev Z.
StateSRI SPA"WI'CH", Zooleznodo:rozhnaya 24, Podolsk, Moscow reg. 142102J.
RUSSIA. Tel. :095-137-9258. Fax. :095-137-9384. E-m. :l􀇛tis.kiae.su


Abstract

The study of tritium generation narure in seoood, sla,ed down stage is
cx:nducted, and the registration of X-ray is executed, which can arise at
interacti.an of hydrogen isotops in metals with thermal activation.

It is shown, that seoood, sla,ed down stage of trititDD acr,mulation in
gas at laig interaction of bydrogen isotops with heated up sample can be
connected with nuclear reactions since is experimentally shown, that at interaction
of heated up metal sanples with hYdrogen isotops the tri ti.um concentration
in gas was decreases for .reasai of tritilBD transition in sample,
stiptlated by isotops effects. It is established, that at laig interaction
of hydrogen isotops with heated up metal sanple the tritium generation rate
is increased of direct proportionally to increase of the hydrogen pressure,
in contrast to thernv-activatian 􀇜. 􀇝 tritium generation rate
which was registered an this stage has w
4-lllf a:t/s. The darking of X-ray
films, which was disposed inside of chamber, while should not wiequ:i vocally
to be camected with X-ray radiation.


1 Introduction

At excitation of nuclear .reactions in condensed media betAeen of charge
particles with low energy interacti.an (NROI), ooe of nein, registered pro­
ducts is the tritium (1-3]. The ratio of generatian rates for various of
reactioos products which generating in the sanple with hydrogen by means of
bcnbardme:nts ions £.ran plasne of the poAlerful glow discharge has for neutralS/
tri tium, about 10
-9
-10
-7
; for charge particle/tri ti.1.BD, about
10􀇞 - 10􀇟 ; for ganma-ray/trit.i.um, about 10􀇠 - 10􀇡 [2,3]. It is th.is possib-
le to ocnclude, that at occurrence NR01 an hYdrogen isotops, basically, can
be generated and to be registered ally tri ti.lBD alooe. In [ 4, 5] was shown,
that the tri ti.um generation £.ran metals is J:X)SSible not only at effect of
accelerated ions, bit also in envirooment of ordinary bydrogen (proti.1.BD +
0,015 % deuterium) and deuterium at thernel activatian. Two stages of such
processes are revealed: first-fast and seoood-slowed down, which have the
basic di.stinctian an properties.


Such characteristic features of NR01 is renDYe, at present, the problem
to study for 􀇢 generation of low energy charge particles and
X-ray .radiation an first location. Ckt all visibi.licy-, for mentioned process
X-ray radiatian is the unique kind of radiati.an, which can be safe-cy fixed
in process NR01.

The present work is devoted to study of tri ti.um genera.ti.an narure in se­
cond, slowed down stage and approachs to .registration of X-ray .radiation at
interacti.an of hydrogen isotops in metals by thmnal activatian.

2. Experimental design and proceduer

The experiments oo interactions of hydrogen isotops in metal sanple:s at
t.mxmal activation was oanducted similarly to description in [5], bit with
additi.alal, laig endurance of heated up metal sanples in envirooments of
bydrogen isotops.

The samples were made of alloy Fe-Cr-Ni-Ti ( 71-18-10-1 ) , in kind of
plates with thickness of 0.5 mn, which were set up in section :fran 3 to 6
pieces and developed as zigzag (Fig. 1). The size of coe piece nede 0,5
x aE x 1'm nm3 . The maximal tesq;ierature of such sanple reached 900 K, and
at rolling up its in spiral could be within the limits of ll.02J-laE K.

The experiment oonducted as follORS. In the beginning the working clan­
ber was i;unp out, heated up the sanple to given telq;lerature and caxlucted
-3 gas out of working chamer at pressure P<10 Pa! _1durlng 1-2 h. Th:n in
chamer fill up the 􀆕 to pressure (5-00) · w- Pa and enduranced the
definite tine (0,1-50 h). Further the hydrogen pmp cut in rubber volume
for subsequent bnn:ing, preparation of water tests and analysis by liquid,
scintillation method. For these exper.i.ments used mbrure of hf'drogen isotops
with ooocentration from 0,015 % deuterium in protium (ordinary hf'drogen),
tritium ocntents in plasma-forming gas nede on fulfilled technique, with
error which was not ex.oeed :!: 50 % [2, 3].

After has becaue clearly, that the slnrt-tenn hlrsts of tri til.DD ooooentratiai
an the first stages are stipulated, basically, by thermal activaticn
early acam1lnted, began to conduct in additiai the loog endurance in byd.roge.!l
of sanple heated up to working telq;lerature (DDre often maximal), with
subsequent gradual selection of gas for analysis en the tritium in seoond
stages. '.l'hJs the ini ti.al stage was oonducted as with cold, as with heated
up sanple. The loog experiments oo seoond stages conducted as caitinuation
of short-tenn experiments, as a:ftei:wards them, at total :[llllJp-OUt of gas
with increased activity. The similar experiments with thermal activation
were then conducted on short, cne plates sanples from titanium and niobium,
where the teoparature reached 15'0-17021 K.

X-ray films, which was wrap up in tNo-three layers of dark paper, disper­
sed on distance of fi0-aE nm from sanples. Sanetimes in addition had estab­
lishing attenuators from aluminium-10 mkm, 1W mkm or berillium-lW mkm.
The films was enduranoed in chamber in duration of whole e:xperinent ( some tens of h:iurs) and afterwards its tenni.natian di.splayed the hidden image.

3. RFSULTS

The sbort-tenn effects of bydrogen isotops on heated up sa111>le permit to
lONer to m:injnnm the initial activity in .sanple (quantity of tritium) befo­
re subsequent laig experiments (first two points on Fig. 2). At subsequent, 
laig endurances of sanples in envirooments of hydrogen isotops the activity 
is gradually increased. 

The oh5ervabl.e increase of rate is obviously con­
nected with gradual reductian of quantity of gas in chaniJer at each probe 
out ( Fig. 2). The construction fran given this experiment of specific cha­
racteristics shows, that the tritium generatian rate was drops in due cour­
se (Fig. 
3; 1). This the absolute gain of activity versus to time (without 
interaction of pressure ) even is increased ( Fig. 3; 2). The tritium gene­
ration rate is close to di.:rect proportionality fran pressure of bydrogen 
(Fig. 4), in against to htrsts of activity in slx>rt-term experiments [ 5 ] . 

The results the 11K>St of characteristic experiments an tritium genera­
tion are adduced in Tab. 1. 
f,12 
  2000 
  1000 
Time. h. 

Fig. 2. The dependence of probe b,ydrogen activity fran t:iJDe at laig 
experiments (alloy Fe-Cr-Ni-Ti (71-18-10--1), 3 secticns, T= 9m K. 

3. The dependence of tritium generation rate and specific gain of

activity fran time of experiment (alloy Fe-Cr-Ni-Ti (71-18-10--1), 
!-tritium generation rate; 2-gain of probe specific activities. 
Pressure  x1000 Pa. 

Fig. 4. The dependence of tri ti.um generation rate f.ran pressure of hyd­
rogeri (sanple-alloy Fe-Cr-Ni-Ti (71-18-10-1), 3 sections, T  K. 

X-ray films, located en cooling bottan of chantier with d:istanoe
abcut 2l1E nm to sanple, after laig exper:inelts ( sooe days) was not
dark. The films located oo. di.stance abc:ut l.'20 11111 f.ran sanple was dark,
however in this case should not to be excluded the influence of thernal
heating, f.ran which the films also can was dark.


4. DISCUSSION

The second stages of triti.tn accuouJ ti.on in hydrogien isotops at inte­
raction with heated up metal sanple, 
representing in OOQllariscn, slow lif­
ting of triti.tan concentration (Fig. 
2) can be connected Jrlth nuclear reac­
tions. 
&ich opinion Re state becaiase. 
in first, 
as was established fran 
slx>rt-tenn experiments that the tri timn corx,entrati.oo in gas which interact
Jrl th heated up sanple is fast decreasing and reached of .minimJm equilibrum 
ooooentration by given ocmdi ti.ems. 

So is displ..a,,ed the effect isotops di­
rect, when nnre heavy isotope heavier introdused in metal, hJwever it there 
and better is kept, in coopariscn with nnre lights isotops. 

Re.sul ts in 
that, that the tri ti.um ooncentration in metal is :i.ncl'eaMng, 
lowering its 
ooooentration in envircOleita.l gas (Fig. 5 [6]). Stationazy ocmditicms have 
not the reasoos for spontaneous allocation tri ti.um :fran metal, neverthe­
less, at long endurances of heated up metal sanples in envi.rooments ordina­
i:y hydrogen (protium + 0,015 % deuterium) or deuterium, the tri ti.um con­
centration in gas by gradually is inoreasing. As far as in gas the tri ti.um 
is not present, growth of tritium ccnoentration in gas can be only by con­
sequence for increase of equilibrum oancentration tri ti.um in metal sanple. 

Hence, growth of tri tit.ti ooncentration in gas and metal sanple, at long en­
durances can happen only for reason of updating :fran nuclear reactions on 
hYdrogen isotops in metal sanple. 

In secood, in contrast to the first 
short-term phases of the tritium generation rate on given stage was increa­
sed of direct proportiana]Jy :fran hYdrogen pressure (Fig. 4 and [3]). 

The researches with X-.rqy films are vei:y i.np:>rt;ant in scientific plan 
for possible ackrialledgement of availabili -cy for nuclear reactions of low 
energy. 

These researches also can be first stage for begini.ng of study 
X-ray radiation by spectroscopy methods. However it is acknowledgement of
availabili 1:¥ X-ray radiation in low energy experiments tmtil was received
and required the further researches on divisions of thermal and X-.rqy ef­
fects on X-ray films.


5. CXHilJSIOOS

5 .1. The seccod, slOAed down stage of tri ti.um acx:unul ation in gas at

long interaction of hydrogen isotops with heated up sanple can be camected 
with nuclear reacti.<ms since is experimentally shoHn, that at interaction 
of heated up metal .5a111:>les with   isotops the tri titn ooncentration 
in gas decreases for reason of tritium transi ti.cm in sauple, stiptlated by 
isotops effects. 

It is established, that at long interaction of   
isotops with heated up metal sanple the tri ti.um generation rate is increa­
sed as di.l.'ect proportionally to increase of l\vdrogen pressm:e, in contrast 
to thernn-activa:tion processes. Registered of the tritiDn  tion rate 
on this stage has 1IBde w4 -uf' at/s.

5.2. The darldng of X-ray films, which was placed inside of chcmi,er, :
while it stntld not uaegui.vocally to ooonect with X-ray radia:ti<XIS. 
  

1. V.A.Raoodanov, V.I.Savin, M.V.Shakhirin et al. International Confe­

rence on Radiative Material Science. Alushta, Kay 22-25,1990. Theses of the 
:reports. Kharkov, 1990, 1-95, part II, p. 00 ( in Russian) . 

2. V. A. Rcm:xianov, V. I. Savin, M. V. Shakwr:i.n et al.

Zblrnal Tekhnicheskoy Fiziki, 1991, v.61, is.5, p.122-125 ( in Russian ) . 

3. V. A. Rcm:xianov, V. I. Savin, Ya. B. Slmratnik.

Progress In New Hydrogen Energy. Prooeed:i:ngs. IOCF-6, <xrtober 13-18, 1996, 
Japan. Ed. by M.<Jmnnto. NKOO, IAE. Tokyo, Japan, 1996, V .2, p. 590 - 594. 

4. V.A.Baoodannv, V.I.Savin, Ya.B.Skura:mi.k.. IbideuV/ V.2,p.585-589.

5. V.A.Raoodanov, V.I.Savin, Ya.B.Slmratnik. Cold tbclear Fusion (Ma­

terials of the 4-d Russian conference on cold fusion and  lei transm.rt.a­
tion.  . Sochi. M.: SRC Pl'P "KRZiaf" ,(1997), p. 63-69. (In lbssian). 

6. V.A.&mxianov, V.I.Savin, Ya.B.Slmratnik, V.N.Majorov.

Tritium Generation in Meta.ls at Tmrne.l Activation.- Presented on I<ll-7. 
