1. INTRODUCTION

A multi-body fusion model in metal deuteride (especially PdDx and TiDx) has been proposed to
explain anomalous results that have been reported in cold fusion studies. The model assumes that in
lattice dynamic conditions, where plasma oscillation and vibrations of deuterium atoms trapped in metal
lattice are excited coherently, there is possibility that multi-body fusion rates are enhanced drastically
compared with random processes. In this model there are two important points as follows:

1. Deuterium atoms trapped in metal lattice make well-regulated array symmetrically in metal solid.

2. Free electrons, which screen the Coulomb potential wall in nuclear fusion process, can exist.[3,4]

Under these conditions, by ion-beam implantation to metal deuteride, coherent motion of deuterons in
metal is thought to be induced at the end of the beam scanning range or deeper and multi-body fusion is
taken place.[5] The possible channels of the three-body fusion are assumed as follows:

D+D+D  6 Li*(25.32MeV)  d(15.9MeV) + 4He(7.90MeV)------(a)

 t(4.75MeV) + 3He(4.75MeV)------(b)

 n + p + 4He + 20.1MeV------(c)

H+D+D  5 Li*(21.88MeV)  p(19.1MeV) + 4He(4.77MeV) ------(d)

 d(3.30MeV) + 3He(2.20MeV) ------(e)

We have tried to detect charged particles emitted form these channels using silicon surface barrier
detectors (SSBD) and titanium deuteride target (TiDx ). To inspect a reaction channel (b), two kinds of
experiments were carried out under deuteron beam bombardment to TiDx. The one is experiment using a
E-E counter telescope, the other is measurement with reducing pileup signals of D-D reactions. Before
these two experiments, we could not search the unique charged particle spectrum exactly because of
pileup signals of D-D reactions. In proton beam experiment, high energetic protons having 17-20MeV
emitted kinetic energy that might suggest channel (d) have been detected with high reproducibility.
To investigate whether multi-body fusion includes incident particles (direct multi-body fusion) or not
(indirect multi-body fusion), we tried an experiment to irradiate TiDx target with Si-beam. We observed
an isolated peak at about 3.6MeV, which was supposed to be response of triton by channel (b).


2. DEUTERON BEAM EXPERIMENT

Fig. 1 shows the charged particle spectrum emitted from TiDx irradiated by 300keV-deuteron.
Two unique charged particles were observed. They are supposed to be 3He (4.75MeV) and t (4.75MeV)
emitted by 3D fusion. However, the yield of them couldn’t be evaluated precisely because the responses
of 3He (4.75MeV) were on the shoulder of D-D protons and the responses of t (4.75MeV) were on the
pileup signals of D-D protons. To inspect 3He (4.75MeV), experiment using a E-E counter telescope
was performed. Helium-3 by 3D fusion stops in the E detector and doesn’t reach to E detector. Fig.2
shows the charged particle spectra of E (upper Fig.) and E (lower Fig.) respectively. The peak measured
at about 3.5MeV in spectrum of the E detector was assigned to be 3He counts by 3D fusion. The ratio of
the yield of 3He to that of D-D proton was about 2.-4.

In order to estimate the triton by 3D fusion, a
reduction technique of pileup signals of D-D
reactions was applied to experiments of deuteron
beam implantation. The rise time of pileup signals is
longer than single event signal. Then, we can
discriminate between pileup signals and normal
signal by difference of rise times. The spectra shown
in Fig. 3 were obtained under the implantation of
300keV deuteron beam to TiDx sample. Charged
particle spectra with pileup reduction and without
pileup reduction are compared. The spectra were greatly improved by the reduction technique for pileup
signals. Pileup signals of D-D reactions were fully decreased in the range above 3.5MeV. Especially the
peak of alpha-particle by 14N(d, )12C reaction could be confirmed clearly at about 6MeV. The signals in

Fig.1 Charged particle spectrum measured with Ek-detector under
300keV deuteron beam iradiation to TiDx

Fig. 2chargedparticlespectraobserved byEandEdetector
emitted fromTiDximplanted300keVdeuteronbeam

the range of 4-5MeV are supposed to be the responses of triton (4.75MeV) by 3D reactions. The ratio of
the yield of triton by 3D fusion to that of D-D proton was about 2.-4, which agreed with the yield of
3He estimated with E-E counter telescope. It was reported that the reaction rate ratio (R3D/R2D) between
two-deuterons (D+D) and three-deuteron (D+D+D) fusions was about 10-30 [6], which was a typical value
for cascade reactions in random theory.[6,7] Therefore, these two experiments suggest that 3D multi-body
fusion rate (R3D/R2D~2*10-4) would be greatly enhanced by 1026 times referred to the random theory rate


3. PROTON BEAM EXPERIMENT

We have measured anomalous
high energetic charged particles with
SSBD set up at the back side of the
target during proton beam irradiation to
TiDx. Since the thickness of the target
was 1mm, no charged particles emitted
by impurity reactions and normal D-D
reaction could reach to the detector.
However, protons emitted by multi-
body fusion have enough energy to
reach to the detector after penetrating
through the target and the absorbing
foil set up to reject the scattering
particles in front of the SSBD. In order
to identify these high energetic charged
particles, we changed the thickness of
absorbing foils (Al-410m, Al-450m).

Fig.4 shows energy spectra obtained
under
300keV
proton
beam
implantation to TiDx with two different
absorbing
foils
(upper
fig
aluminum-410m),
(lower
fig
aluminium-450m).

The
difference
between these two spectra indicates
that high energetic charged particle on

Fig. 3 Charged particle spectra emitted from TiDx
implanted with 300keV-deuteron beam

Fig.4 Charged-particle spectrum emitted from TiDx
sample impinged by 300keV-proton

the fig. 4 were of protons emitted with initial kinetic energy of 17~19MeV, considering stopping powers
in the material for different particles. It has been reported that a possible branch of the multi-body fusion;
H+D+D p++23.8MeV, can emit protons with 19.1MeV. Therefore, this result suggests that
multi-body reactions were taken place in TiDx under bombardment with protons.


4. SOLICONE BEAM EXPERIMENT

It is difficult to know whether multi-body fusion includes an incident particle (direct multi-body
fusion). Therefore, in order to search the possibility of indirect multi-body fusion, emitted charged
particles were measured during 4MeV-Si3+ beam implantation to TiDx (fig.5). We observed small isolated
counts around 3.5MeV. In this experimental system, the response beyond the energy of the cascade D-D
proton could not be explained with conventional two-body nuclear reactions under the beam-target
interactions. Considering the energy losses of charged particles within the thickness of screening foil
(Al-5m), it was possible to say that the responses around 3.5MeV were of charged particles emitted by
multi-body reaction; D+D+D t(4.75MeV) + 3He(4.75MeV). Although the perfect identification of the
responses was not possible because of the statistical problem, the possibility of indirect multi-body fusion
was shown in this result.

Fig.5 Charged-particle spectrum emitted from TiDx sample bombarded with 4M eV -Si3+


5. DISCUSSIONS AND CONCLUSIONS

We have found that the 3D multi-body fusion rate has been greatly enhanced in highly deuterated
titanium, by stimulating it with deuteron beam. In the proton beam experiment, we have succeeded in
obtaining high energetic protons with high reproducibility, which were thought to suggest the multi-body
fusion. Some unknown responses were measured around 3.5MeV during Si3+ beam implantation to TiDx.

The investigation of the measurement may be needed to identify these responses, for example, by
applying the E-E counter telescope with extremely thin E (~10m).

Three experimentally obtained results discussed in this paper can be explained with multi-body
fusion induced with stimulating highly deuteron-preloaded titanium target.


REFERENCES

[1] A. Takahashi et al.: Fusion Technology, 34(1998)
[2] A. Takahashi et al.: Physics Letters A225(1999) pp.89-97
[3] A. Takahashi et al.: Fusion Technology, 19(1991) pp.380-390
[4] A. Takahashi et al.: Fusion Technology, 27(1995) pp.71-85
[5] K. Ochiai et al.: Fusion Technology, 36(1999) pp.315-323
[6] A. Takahashi et al.: Anomalous Enhancement of Three-Body Deuteron Fusion in Titanium-Deuteride
with Low-Energy D+ Beam Implantation, Fusion Technology, 34(1998) pp.256-272
[7] Y.Isobe et al.: Jpn.J.Appl.phys.Vol.41 (2002) pp.1546-1556
Energy(MeV)
