1. Introduction

An early attempt at the University of Ottawa ( 1) to replicate the
work of Fleischmann and Pons (5) failed to produce excess heat.
Analyses later found silica in the lithium metal and on both the palladium
cathode and platinum anode along with traces of base metals.

lsoperibolic calorimetry (6) describes how heat, generated in a cell,
establishes a temperature difference between that cell and its
surroundings. Recent work (4) has described how each electrode in this
cell may be potted separately with one side exposed to the electrolyte
while the other contacts a thermocouple well which is potted in resin.
Each half cell can then be treated as a separate isoperibolic electrode
calorimeter. However, excess heat was not observed in LiOD.

Therefore, the work was shifted to ordinary water (9, 10) where
replication of excess heat seemed to be more easily accomplished.
However, excess heat was not observed until contaminant silica was
added as will be described. 


2. Methods

The cell and blank for 0.57M K2C03 in H20 were 75ml unsilvered 
dewars. The cathode of 38x40x0.03mm (30cm2) Ni foil was spot 
welded to 2mm Ni rod and wound as a 5mm pitch spiral with about 1 .3 
turns. The 10x25mm Pt anode was spot welded to 0.5mm Pt wire. 

Both Ni and Pt were sheathed above the electrolyte. A 1 on resistor 
served as calibration heater immersed in oil in a 5mm OD tube. Separate 
power supplies provided cell and heater current. The temperatures (of 
the cells and the bath), voltages and currents were monitored with an 
Acurex Autograph 800 data logger. 

Well aged Ni was prepared for use by smoothing with a wooden 
dowel, rubbing with fine steel wool, degreasing in alcoholic KOH and 
coating with silica. Alternatively, it was polished with Tripoli, green 
rouge and blue rouge before degreasing and coating with 5mg silica. 

Ottawa lab distilled water contains only 0.02ppm Si02; our K2C03 
contained 16ppm Si02 • Fresh 0.57M K2C03 contained 70ppm. Our best 
heating so far has been observed in 0.57M K2C03 to which 100ppm 
Si0 2 and 1 Oppm FeCl3 were added (Fe first, Si0 2 next, age, and add 
K2C03). Following use, this solution was found to contain 1 OOppm Si0 2 • 


3. Results

Electrode heating vs input watts is plotted in Fig. 1 as reported 
elsewhere (4). The lower X-axis reflects the voltages of D2 and 0 2 
evolution against Hg/HgO reference electrodes. These voltages project 
(at zero current) to zero watts on the upper x-axis. 

The cathodic 
evolution of D2 from Pd slopes up to the left (at negative watts) while 
the anodic evolution of 0 2 from Pt slopes up to the right. Fresh metals 
exhibited the greatest heat per watt. On aged metals, oxygen evolution 
yielded four times as much heat as hydrogen evolution. 

Freshly prepared 0.3N LiOD provided different results. 

First, 
stirring was found to reduce cell heating per watt input. Second, both 
reference electrodes developed bubbles in their capillaries which 
interfered with their accuracy; bubbles became more numerous as the 
run progressed. When dismantled, both reference electrodes had white 
scale at the top of their electrolyte; the scale did not dissolve in acid and 
was probably silica. No bursts of heat were observed. 

In K2C03 electrolyte, cell and calibration heating were equal at 
first. 

Heating developed after 1 OOppm silica was added to the 
electrolyte. The highest heats seen in Fig. 2 were produced in K2C03 
with Si02 and FeCl3 present. The sharp rise after the 24 hour calibration 
occurred when the aged Ni cathode was replaced with a freshly polished 
and silica coated Ni. The isothermal calibration points required about 
two hours each with cell power turned off while resistive heating was 
fine tuned to hold the cell temperature constant. 

Similar results were observed in Na2CO3 with SiO2 and FeCl3 
contrary to the theory of Mills (9). 


4. Discussion

Silica, found in chemicals and some lab distilled waters, dissolves 
from Pyrex at 5mg/cm2/hr in alkaline solution. Its chemistry is complex 
(3, 7). Various sizes and shapes of particles may exist as stable colloids. 

These deposit as a monolayer especially on grease free metal oxides; 
thereafter, VanDerWaals forces repel other colloidal particles. In a cold 
fusion cell, electrophoretic forces carry silica to the anode while tri and 
tetravalent metal ions with a silica sheath move to the cathode. There 
they cannot stick but form gels which may thicken the solution or adhere 
to the cell walls depending on their size, shape, porosity and 
thermophoretic forces. Aging could lead to changes. 

Thus, in aged LiOD the calorimeters performed well. 

In fresh 
LiOD, silica gel trapped evolving gases which escaped into Luggin 
capillaries carrying some gel with them. Silica in K2C03 solution, and 
coated on both Ni and Pt, enhanced the observations of excess heat. 

This may be true on Pd as well. 

Lithium silicate gels at 80°C and dissolves when cooled; this 
contrasts to sodium and potassium silicates which gel when cold. Thus, 
operation with warm lithium deuterate could produce a gel and lead to 
heat retention and bumping. 

It is possible that phase shifts in silica deposits could produce 
fusion products not unlike those observed in Pd-D and Ti-D systems 
(2,8) or as trace contaminants from fumaroles and volcanoes ( 11, 12). 

Indeed, volcanoes may be produced when silicate rocks undergo phase 
changes and exhibit related phenomena. 


5. Conclusions

It is concluded that four times more heat is generated during the 
evolution of oxygen from Pt than from the evolution of deuterium from 
Pd. Silica interfered with some observations and must be controlled 
before results are certain. 

The presence of silica in 0.5M K2CO3 and Na2CO3 enhanced the 
observations of excess heat on Ni. A deliberate coating of silica on the 
anode and cathode also proved beneficial. 

This silica was also 
associated with changes in cell calibration constant. 

It is concluded further that heating in our cells varied with the 
condition of silica coating the cathode, with stirring rate and with the 
amount of silica that coated the cell walls. While phase changes are 
anticipated in silica involved in this system, and while such changes may 
give rise to excess heat and to some nuclear products, it was not 
determined whether significant heating occurred on anodes, cathodes, 
cell walls or in solution. Further work is required. 

The financial support of EMR Canada, CAN MET Alternative Energy 
Division, to this work is gratefully acknowledged. 


6. References

Adams, W. A. et.al., presented at the 176th Meeting of The
Electrochemical Society, Florida, 1989.

Beltyukov, I. L. et.al., Fusion Technology, Vol. 20, September
Brinker, C. J. and Scherer, G. W., Sol-Gel Science, Academic
Press, 1991.

Criddle, E. E., 182nd Meeting of The Electrochemical Society,
Toronto, 1992.

Fleischmann, M., Pons, S. and Hawkins, M., J. Electroanal. Chem.
261 (1989) and 263 (1989).


Gur, T. M. et.al. Special Symp. Proc. on Cold Fusion WHEC #8.
lier, R.K., The Chemistry of Silica, Wiley, 1979.

Jome, J., Fusion Technology, Vol. 19, March 1991.

Mills, R. L. and Kneizys, S. P., Fusion Technology, Vol. 20,
August 1991.

Noninski, V. C., Fusion Technology, Vol. 21, March 1992.

Palmer, E. P., AIP Conf. Proc. 228, Provo, UT, 1990.

Sheely, E. V., AIP Conf. Proc. 228, Provo, UT, 1990.

