TRITIUM GENERATIONS IN NETALS AT THERMAL .AC'IIVATION
Vitaliy Romodanov A., Valeriy Savin I. .•Yakov Skuratnik B.,
**Valeriy Majorov N.
StateSRI SPA"Wl'<ll", Zheleznodo:rozhnaya 24, Podolsk, Moscow .reg. 1421.ffl.
ROOSIA. Tel. :mf>-137-9258. Fax. :mf>-137-9384. K-m. :􀈍.kiae.su


AIETRAC'l'

The researches of thenoo-activated tritium generation is oooducted, arising
at high t.esq;,erature in metals interacting with hydrogen isotops and
the nature of this generation is discovered. The .researches are conducted
on sanples of iroo. and its alloys as well as on sanples of titanium and niobium
at interaction, basically, with o.rd.inar,y hydrogen. It is established,
that the soort-tem hlrsts of tritium generatiai, arising at interaction of
hydrogen isotops in which is inmersed, previously heated up metal sanple,
are oamected with outpit tritium, early acx,mdated, owing of effects iso­
tops.


1. IN'I'B.DX!TIOO

In [ 1,2 ] was sh)wii, that the outpit tritium nan metals is possible
not cnly at effect of accelerated ialS, bit also in media of deuterium and
ordinazy hYdrogen (protium + 0,015 % deuterium) at thernel activation. These
ex.perim:mts have revealed the ca1Plex kinetic of tritiUID acx,:nulation in
the plasma-forming gas, even at use, as active media, ordinazy hYdrogen aily.
At caaparable total acx,ml];:tted of tritium, in conditiais of thernel
activation, :registered the generatioo. rate cotld be even greater ( wffl -w11
at/s), for :reason of short time (0,25-5 mmrt.es) [ 2 ] . In 􀈎imi Jar exper.iDBl.ts
was :received the exponential increasing of tritium generatioo. rate
versus teqleratnre, dependence on :reduction of the tritium generation rate
versus pressure of gas and is soown, that optinon on tritium generatioo. rate
have 10 % deuteritRD, for mixes 􀈏 is in region.

The present work is devoted to s1lldy of trititRD generation, arising at
thermal activation in net.al sanples at effect of hydrogen isotops and determination
the nature for tritium generated on variaJS stages of experinert.


2. AL DESIGN AND mx!EOORE

In quality of the first sanples for new techniqμes used large, the hollow
cylinder of alloy Fe-Cr-Ni-Ti (71-18-10-1). weight about 10 kg and area
of surface about 2 m
2
(Fig. 1) .

The .sanple 1 have placed is coaxial in the vacuuam chamber 3 with water
cooling 4. The sanple 1 heated up with help .resistive heater 2 of m:.>lybdemun
wire, with capacity of supply to 5 KW. The chamber 1 was ccoled by water
for protection of elastic hennetically seales fian aver-heating. The
taq;,erature of sanple, during preliminary heating, .reached 670 K. The expe­
riment conducted as follows. In the beginning the worlrl.ng chamber was punp
out, the sanple heated up to given taq:ierature and have caxiucted it
out-gas:i.ng at pressure P < lfif1 Pa, during 1-2 h. Then in chamber filled the
hydrogen to pressure (5 - 60)· iJi3 Pa and maintained the definite time (0,1-
!:0 h). Further the hYdrogen p.mp out in .rubber volume for subsequent rur--­
ning, p.reparatiai of tests water and analysis by liquid, scintillatiai .method.
For experiments used .mixbJre of isotops with ooocentratiai nan 0,015
% deuterium in protium (ordinary􀈑) to 95 % deuterium and 5 % protium
( technical deuterium). The measurement of contents tri ti.um in plas ma-forming gas Wlsnede en fulfilled program with erzor was not exoeed :!:􀄾 %
(1-3].

For devel.􀄿t of thenn-activatiai technique inside to sanple of alloy
Fe-Cr-Ni-Ti (71-18-10-1) had displac8Dellt the new saaple of technical
inn ( C< 0,1 %) sizes 2 x 􀀇 x 1􀅀 DD. The Fe sanple was displacement
coaxial to sanple of alloy Fe-Cr-Ni-Ti (71-18-10-1), was heated up by stra­
ight miss of electric rurrent to 􀅁ture 7f::r0 K and, actnalJ.y, it was as
additiaial heater for sa111:>le of alloy Fe-Cr-Ni-Ti (71-18-10-1). For subse­
quent researches at t.eaperatures to 9120 K sanple of Fe was nede as zigzag,
and after the sanple of alloy Fe-Cr-Ni-Ti (71-18-10-1) was reaoved :fran
chamber of the installatioo. Similarly the new sanple was then nede of al -
loy Fe-Cr-Ni-Ti (71-18-10-1), caisi.sting :fran plates of thlckness about 0,5
DID, which were set up in secti.ai :fran 3 to 6 pieces. The size of cme piece
was equal 0,5 x 􀁝 x 1.flll1lr DID. The .lllaXllBl. tanperature of such sanple 􀅂
ached 9120 K, at rolling up its in spiral could be within the limits of
lliD-1􀁝 K. <kl described sanples the experiments were oooducted, basi.ca.1-
ly, at shnt-tem p.rocessis. The􀅃. deuterium or their mixes filled
in chamber, with heated up to NOiking tanperature sanple, and then, <DlS.istently,
selected the tests of gas as at swi tcbed off, as at included heating
of sanple. The part of similar experiments oooducted in therno-cycl.es
.regime ( about 10 cycles) , with periods of heating and cooling to several
tens of minutes.


3. Results

The rate of sanples cooling of Fe and alloy Fe-Cr-Ni-Ti (71-18-10-1) af­
terwards filled of hYdrogen and switching-off of heating in coaxial geanet­
.ry was great sufficiently and it had cooling in duratioo about 0,5 h to ro­
an taq;Jerature. 

The schedules for dependence of gas test acti. vi qr oo tri titn versus ti­
me, 
after heating of sanple in hydrogen media as well as afterwards filled 

of hydrogen in chancer with heated up sanple and subsequent switching-off 
heating, are shown an Fig. 2. It is visible, that the activity .reaches the 
maxi.num during 15-m s and then slowly drops. This appreciably, that hea­
ting of sa111.>les together with hydrogen (Fig. 
2; 4,5,6) gave nuch no.re les­
ser the level of activity an size, in calP'll'isan with prel.iminary heating 
of saoples in vactUD ( Fig. 
2; 1,2,3). It is possible it happened because 
of nm:-e low  ture of sanples, achievable during heating ( determined 
Time. h. 10 
Fig. 2. The dependence of gas activity tests for h,drogen versus 
the, for various tecbn:i.(1..leS of heating sanple. 1, 2, 3-- p.re.l i mi nary heating 
of saq;>le in vacuum; 4,5,6- heats of sanple together with -
increased heat-transfer of h,drogen an sy:sten of cooling). 

The typical dependence of h,droeen acti.Yi ty versus ti.a} of experiment is 
s1om an Fig.  Appreciably, that heating of sanple to  ture about 
8!i0 K in vacuum with constant detectian of activity , does not result in 
significant tri ti.um outprt :fran sanple, and only afteNanJs filled of  ­
rogen in chancer the activity was increased nearly an three order. Follows 
to   attentian, that for sul eqneot 3t h the activi t¥ has decreased in 7 

Fig. 3. T:he change of acti vi t¥ of hYdrogm an various st.ages of 
experiment. 
'nlernD-cycles of sanples has allOAed to establish, that the increase of 
gas acti. vi ty happened not at the time of heating, hit in during cooling of 
ICCF-7 
saaples ( Fig. 

It is naturaly for saoples of alloYS Fe-Cr-Ni-Ti 
(71-18-10-1), as in its the solubility of   at .redJcti.on of   
ture was decreases.  
Time, h. 
. 'i 
Fig. 4. The change of  ture .for sa111Ple and ll,drogm activity at 
thenoo-cycles (sanple: FEralloy Fe-Cr-Ni-Ti (71-18-10-1)) . 
The sanples which was made as zigag and rolli.ng up in spiral have  
aled, that after hlrst of activity the recessicn happens faster with heated 
up saq,le. 

Already on Fig. 5 appreciably, 
that the :recessiai of activity 
happened is DO:re sharp at increase of heating duraticn for sanple w.i th h,d­
ro,Jell. 
It is .repeating of thei:mo-cycles has shown, 
that the tri ti.um generation 
DD:re depends .f.ran the h,drogen pressme in chamber, 
than .fran  ti ty and 
parameters therm:rcycl.es. The aijori ty of experiments denoistrated the inc­
rease of tritium generation .rate, 
at short-term processis, 
with .reduction 
of h,drogen pres5Ure in chaniler (Fig. 6). 
Time, h. 

Fig. 5. The dependence of activity for hydrogen tests versus tine, cn 
various stages of experiment ( sanple: FErzigzag). 
1- ture; 2-pressure; 3-acti vi ty.

The .results the nost of characteristic experiments en tri titm1 generaticn 
are adduced in Tab. 1. 


4. DISCCESIOI

Found out 1¥ us, 
the effect of short-tem outpit tritium fran heated up
sanple at interact:i.oo with h,drogeo and deuterium interesting 1:¥ theme, 
that the time of outpit for main quantit;y is very small (15-311 s). The sub-

Fig. 6. The dependence of tri ti.um geoeratioo rate ven;us pressure 
of h,drogeo, at thernn-cycles (saaple:Fe-all.F Mi-Ti(71-18- 1)). 
1-03.02.97; 2-11.02.97; 3-11.00.97; 4-17 .00.97. 

Table 1. 

Tte characteristic results of experinerts on trltun generaticms, 
with ordinary mix of   i.satops as active ne:lia, for new saaples 
Na-
Cur- Tem- Time Time 6 Pre-   Trititmt 
Specific 
sequent decrease of activity happens 100:re slowly, bit can be significant on 
size and enxagh fast (minute, 
lnlrs) at sanple heated up. 

These features 
for interaction of hydrogen isotops with heated up metal sanple can render 
the influence on final results of experinerts, 
especially short-term ones. 

Such effect can be useful to use for cbmbnn of initial tritium concentra­
tion in the sanple at long-term experiments. Then carry cut it is previoos­
ly one or sane filled of hydrogen on hot saaples with subsequent cntpn­
ping. 

ICCF-7 
The tritium out.pit for sanples of ircn and alloys as stainless steel was 
ob5erved at down:tum of  ture, that, obviously, 
is connected with 
decrease of hydrogen solubility (Fig. 4). For hYdridefo.nning of metals and 
alloys the return dependence should be observed and tritium £ran sanples 
should leave when heating. 

The researches have shown, that the new sanples, early not take part in 
experiments an tritium generatian, bad enough the low soort-term activity 
(Tab .1) , which, thereto in due cour.se decreased. This fact, as well as that 
the tritium generation rate was increased at reducti.cm of hydrogen pressure 
(Fig. 6) and, practically, did not depend £ran the thenoo--cycles parame­
ters, yes and tendency of soort-term activity (Fig. 2, 5) in due cour.se to 
decrease nearly to initial cxmdi.tion (at teat:ed up sanple). unequivocally 
prove the unnuclear nature of opened phenanenon. It is this possible to 
conclude, that the effect s rt-term of activiv change for bydrogien iscr 
tops, at their interacti.oos with heated up metals, teioe, and i.nc:rease ac­
tiviv (tritium generation), is ooonected with mtprt. early acnwdated of 
tritium nan sanple and sub;equent its absozpt.j.on in the same sanple and 
envizaJmental surfaces of installation. Obrioosly, such bebavicur of tri. ti -
um is connected with dynamic displaing of isotops effect, fixed in [ 4 ] . 
<Al all visibility, change of activity in .results by O . .ReifenscbNeiler is 
ooonected just with transfusioo of tri ti.um £ran sanple in envi..rammtal at­
.mspbere and back, 
at changes of t.elll)erature [ 5 ] . 

The possible useful use, opened by us, displaing of bydrogen isotops ef­
fects, 
can ooo.si.st that at <111.y out.pm(>ing of gas cm rursts of activity is 
possible to be .reduced the ini ti.al ocm.centratiai tritium in sanple, 
for 
increase of accuracy and rel.iabili ty of :further researches. 


5. CXHUJSIOO

5.1. It is established, that the soort-term rursts of tritium generati­:
an, arising at interact.i.an of l:\ydrogen isotops in which is .inmersed, previ­
ously heated up, metal sanple, are camected with out.pit, early aco11111J ;<tted 
of tritium, owing to isotops effects. 

5. 2. It is necessary to take into accol.Ult the large opporbmi. ties of

these effects, 
in case of use for 5a111.>les with crlnixture of tritium, since 
they can affect the final resu.l ts of experiments. 

5. 3. The possible useful use displaing of hYdrogen isotops effects, can

calSist that at duly Ol.lqU!ping of gas cm b.u:sts of activity is possible to 
be redilCEld the initial concentratian tritium in sanple, for increase of ac­
curacy and reliabi.li ty of further researches. 
  
1. V .A .lblooanov, V. I. Savin, Ya .B. Skuratnik.

Progress In New Hydrogen 
Energy. P.rooeedings. ImF-6, October 13-18, 1996, Japan. Ed. by M.Clmnnto. 

NEOO, 
IAK. Tokyo, Japan, 1996, V.2, p. 585- 589. 

2. V. A. Rcmxianov, V. I. Savin, Ya. B. Skuratnik.. Cold 1'llclear Fusi.at (Hate-­

rials of the 4-d Russian oon:fe:renoe on CX>ld fusion and nuclei transmrtati -
on.  s. Sochi, M.: SRC Pl'P "KRZI ", 1997, p. 63-69. (In lbssian). 

3. V.A.Rcmxianov, V.I.Savin, Ya.B.Slmratnik and Yu.M. Tiloofeev.

Vop.rosy Atamoj Nauki i Tekhniki. 

Ser: Radiatian Damage Phvsics and Radia­
ticm Technology, 1992, n. 1(58), 2(59), p. 73-82. (In Russian). 

4. V.A.Bam:xianov.

Patent of lESR N 4331J994, £ran 1987 .10. , ICI G21 B 1/W. 

5. 0. Reifenschweiler. Reduced Radioactivity of Tritium in Small Titanium

Particle.- PhYs. Lett. A184, 149 ( 1994 ). 
