Abstract

This talk consists of three parts: the first on the "pathological" nature of
Cold Fusion ( CF) phenomena, the second on a wide theoretical effort based
on the new ideas of QED coherence in matter, and the third replying to
explicit criticisms to my work.


The "pathological" Science of Cold Fusion

Six years after the momentous announcement of 1farch 23, 1989 the world
of Science is still divided: a large majority that regards Cold Fusion (CF) an
eminent example of "pathological" science, a small battered minority that
still carries on with very limited means, both financial and, alas, intellectual,
struggling for the survival of the grandiose dream that Fleischmann and
Pons (FP) brought to mankind that now distant spring day of 1989.

Why did it go this way? Why a phenomenology1 that has found so
many diverse confirmations by several different experimental groups, has
failed to convince such a large number of scientists, that have turned their
back on this fascinating field?

I believe we must try to give an honest answer to these important questions,
for if we fail to understand why so many of our colleagues perceive
CF as a pathological form of science, we are doomed to remain marginal
even if we will able, as in fact we are doing, to make substantial progress.

It seems to me that the basic reason why CF is almost universally considered
"pathological", is that it is so at odds with deeply rooted expectations
based on the generally accepted picture of condensed matter and nuclear
physics, that it requires the established scientist an almost heroic effort even to bring himself to look into such a bizarre set of physical phenomena ( the
situation is of course different for the scientists that live somewhat at the
margin of Academia, and this has been part of the problem of CF).

Without a well defined frame that can accomodate the strange looking
facts of CF, indeed its "miracles", the natural reaction of scientists is at
best to ignore those facts, at worst to believe them the result of some
kind of fraud. And, of course, we have seen all that. But, instead of
moralistically condemning such attitudes (which in truth have caused us no
minor suffering), as I have just stressed, we should try to put ourselves in
the shoes of the many colleagues with whom, before that fateful day of the
spring of 1989, ,ve had a perfectly reasonable kind of relationship.

Confronted with the experimental landscape of CF, what do they see?
The following "monstruosities":
i) the deuterons, that are well known to crowd a Pd cathode in a heavy water
electrolytic cell, and to accomodate in the octahedral sites of its lattice, are
supposed to undergo nuclear fusion at rates hundreds of orders of magnitude
higher than what one expects in the Drmolecule, where the deuterons are
located even closer.
ii) not only do the deuterons (supposedly) fuse, defying all known condensed
matter physics, but they would do so following a nuclear physics path, that
is completely at variance with the known path, for ,vhich the two reactions
D + D-+ n (2.45 MeV) +
3 He (0.82 MeV)
D + D -+ p (3.02 MeV) +
3 H (1.01 MeV)
have each a branching ratio close to 50%.

Countless papers, books, sermons etc. have been written and uttered to
admonish us all about the senseleness of what the CF scientists pretended
to have experimentally demonstrated, and how their refusal to repent and
recant jeopardized, indeed discredited the whole scientific community. By
the way, the tones and the practices of the keepers of scientific orthodoxy
in the CF debate have been remarkably close to those of the critics and
enemies (mostly churchmen) of the Renaissance science, who finally saw
the better part of Bruno, Galilei and their followers. And indeed, in the
present frame of understanding both condensed matter and nuclear physics,
there is no way to reconcile the above two "monstruosities" with the huge
body of knowledge that is based upon the dominating paradigm. Thus, let
us make a little investment in philosophy (a most abhorred and derided
intellectual enterprise by the normal scientist2 of today) and try to char
·acterize the deep roots of the paradigm, for without it not only are wecondemned to a permanent and futile warfare and misunderstanding with 
our colleagues, but we will also remain unaware of the remarkable revolution 
that the "monstruosities" of CF are bringing about in modern science. 

If one wishes to characterize with a single concept the paradigm, I believe 
the best of all is : Asymptotic Freedom (AF). The concept of AF, as far as 
I know, was first explicitly discussed in 1973 [2] within the then consolidat­
ing Standard Model (SlVl) of particle physics: it denotes the property of a 
non-abelian gauge theory (Quantum Chroma Dynamics (QCD)) to become 
(almost) free from interactions when probed at space-time distances which 
become asymptotically negligible with respect to the sizes (   10- 13 cm) of 
the strongly interacting particles ( the hadrons). This peculiarity, which was 
proven within perturbation theory, has become enormously influential, due 
to the apparently natural solution it engenders of the unexpected simple 
structure of the cross sections of highly inelastic scattering of leptons off pro­
tons and neutrons (Deep Inelastic Scattering (DIS)). Besides its seemingly 
high predictive power in DIS, I believe that AF owes its universal accep­
tance to what appears to me as an unconscious psychological attitude, that 
pervades our advanced societies, which has to do with the jealousy for our 
privacy: the wish to become "asymptotically free", when we choose to go 
far from the "madding crowd"; the final triumph of the individual over the 
constraints of collective life. To see this now highly popular dislike of col­
lectivism supported and corroborated by a rigorous result in (perturbative) 
Quantum Field Theory ( QFT) must have certainly enh nced the belief that 
perturbation theory is a very good tool to describe the interactions among 
different levels of reality, involving far away space-time scales. The irony of 
all this, as I thoroughly pointed out in the last several years [3], is that just 
within the theory (QCD), that has led to a rigorous perturbative demon­
stration af AF, there has arisen the most spectacularly paradoxical notion 
of all modern physics, that of the confined quark. For those who are not 
very familiar with all this, let me only point out that the quark is the only 
known constituent of (hadronic) matter that is essentially inseparable 
from the matter it constitutes, i.e. nobody has ever been able, by any phys­
ical means, to take the quarks out of the particles (hadrons) of which they 
are, allegedly, constituents. It so appears that, as far as the quarks are 
concerned, they are not asymptotically free, in the sense that under no 
circumstances can we realistically talk of the individual quark, for unless 
a quark finds in the close environment partners to compensate its colour 
charge, it is condemned to disappear in an all embracing, sticky (recall that 
the quanta of the colour fields are called 

1'gluons") vacuum. Thus the phys­

ical reality (or better unreality) of the quark discredits the notion of AF, 
just in the theoretical framework where this concept was first introduced 
and perturbatively proved. 

But as far as condensed matter physics is concerned, within the pre-
vailing electrostatic picture of interactions, that we may call the "Electro­
static Meccano", AF is a true property of the QFT describing it, and its 
expectations coincide with those of the physics community. Thus according 
to AF it does not make any sense that the nuclear physics of deuterons, with 
its space-time scales six orders of magnitude smaller than the space-time 
scales of the lattice, be any different in vacuum than in the Pd-lattice. Any 
attempt to concoct, through some quantum-mechanical trick3 , an explana­
tion of the CF phenomenology that stays within the tenets of the paradigm 
must necessarily fail, for AF is deeply rooted in the paradigm - I daresay 
it is the paradigm - and there can be no doubt that AF rules out CF 
altogether. 

I believe that it is the poor understanding of this general implication 
of the paradigm that is responsible on one hand for the criticism of the 
majority of the scientific community of the "pathological" nature of CF, 
and on the other of the inanity, worse the outright falsehood, of most of the 
many theories of CF that have been proposed in the last six years. 

But before introducing a new paradigm that avoids the narrow confines 
of AF (which I shall do in the next Section), I wish to conclude this Section 
with a small observation on "pathological science". As well known CF has 
been associated in its "pathology" with another subject that caused a scien­
tific scandal in the seventies, the "polywater" affair. Unlike the discoverers 
of CF, the discoverer of "polywater" - Deryagin - finally recanted, con­
ceding that the water that is found in very thin quart  capillaries is not a 
new strange phase of water but some kind of gel containing a sizable fraction 
of solved silica. This admission was hailed with relief and the deep reward­
ing feeling that scientific rationality had finally triumphed over unsound 
scientific claims and deductions. But, should it have really been so hailed? 

I doubt it, for, if not "poliwater", Deryagin had discovered the incredible 
fact that pure water ( a collection of small, rather featureless molecules) is 
able to attack and dissolve a material that can stand the strongest chemi­
cal agents. Is this understood within the paradigm? A reply to this simple 
question would be highly appreciated. 


Curing the "pathologies": QED coherence in 1natter 

In the introductory Section I have tried to explain that the "pathological" 
nature of the science of CF, as perceived by the large majority of the scien­
tific community, lies in fact not in the wide experimental body of knowledge 
3 Another unhappy aspect of the dominating paradigm is the subjectivism of the Copenaghen 
interpretation of Quantum Mechanics, imbibed of irrationalism. Irrationalism that very often 
is played against whoever asks embarassing questions about the physical bases of universally 
accepted but extremely obscure quantum mechanical developments (such as, for instance, the 
BCS "theory" of cold superconductivity and the Mossbauer effect). 
that reproducibly has been accumulated throughout the world in the last 
six years, but rather in the intellectual framework - the paradigm - that 
dominates not only in physics, but in chemistry and biology as well. 

When dealing with condensed matter phenomena the normal4 scientist 
is led by the paradigm to expect that the constituents of condensed matter 
( atoms, molecules) are bound together by the same kind of forces that bind 
the elementary building blocks of molecular physics, namely electrons and 
ions/nuclei. As we know well, these forces are all of electrostatic nature, 
and have the fundamental property of extinguishing themselves at distances 
larger than a few A's. This property stems from the well known fact that 
condensed matter at scales of just a few A's is neutral. Thus the long range 
part (1/r) of the Coulomb interaction5 is ineffective (De bye screened) at 
distances that exceed a few atomic radii. The mental picture of condensed 
matter, that the paradigm suggests to the normal scientist, is that of a huge 
electrostatic Meccano, where the electrostatic two body (local) interac­
tions are the nuts and bolts that keep the pieces of the Meccano - atoms 
and molecules - glued together to form the enormously complicated struc­
tures of condensed matter: crystals, glasses, hydrogen-bonded liquids etc. 

In this picture macroscopic order, that we contemplate often with marvel 
in matter, both living and inanimate, is the outcome of the juxtaposition 
of the pieces of the Meccano through the holding action of the electrostatic 
nuts and bolts. But just as the l\foccano picture supports, with the aid 
of properly designed blueprints, the possibility of building meaningful, or­
dered structures, when all this is cast in the necessary quantum mechanical 
framework, where all nuts and bolts must be somewhat loose, in abeyance of 
the Heisenberg principle, it becomes highly implausible that such looseness, 
compound over about 1024 (the Avogadro number) elementary systems may 
result in macroscopic structures with the kind of stability and strength that 
we observe in condensed matter. And as a matter of fact, I know of no solv­
able theoretical model that achieves macroscopic order through short range 

interactions6• But there are more specific reasons not to believe in the electrostatic 
Meccano; just to mention a few: the i\Iossbauer effect, ferromagnetism, 

superfluidity, superconductivity, catalysis, experimental realities for which 

there exists only "kinematical" theoretical frameworks, based on "self-consistency" 
, the deep "dynamical" reasons being always postponed to some demiurgical 4see footnote on page 4 

5It is thus very surprising to find that the most popular theory of the quantized Hall effect is 
based on a Hamiltonian for the electrons' system whose interaction term is the pairwise Coulomb 
interaction. 
6The usual objection that I hear to this contention is, of course, in terms of the Ising model. 

However (i) the Ising model is formulated on a lattice, thus on an "a priori" ordered structure, 
(ii) I know of no successful application of the Ising model to any realistic system.
future computation/simulation.

It is for the keen unsatisfaction with the present state of affairs that
a few years ago (1987), having completed a long and difficult analysis of
the Quantum Chromo Dynamics (QCD) ground state [4], in search for an
explanation of the peculiar confinement property of quarks, I started on
a research programme to investigate the possibility that also for QED in
condensed matter systems the ground state (the vacuum) show the highly
non-trivial structure that in QCD explains the paradoxical confinement be­
haviour of quarks. This research quickly met with unhoped for success,
and, as I explained in a series of lectures already in February 1989 [5],
the ideai that the transverse electromagnetic field in the ground states of
condensed matter is well described by an infinite set of quantum harmonic
oscillators in their minimum energy states ( the perturbative vacuum) is
just simply wrong, for it is based on an approximation ( the slowly vary­
ing envelope approximation) that, though fully valid in Laser physics, is
totally inapplicable in systems that are cold and dense enough. And if the
ground state of the e.m. field in condensed matter is in general the pertur­
bative QED ground state, this must mean the doom of the paradigm, for
it systematically ignores an important, indeed a fundamental actor of the
dynamical drama of matter. And if the ground state of a piece of matter,
as the paradigm envisages, is not the loose structure where the elementary
matter systems and the e.m. field each perform their zero-point quantum
oscillations chaotically and independently, what is it, really?

The answer, as widely and thoroughly discussed in a book that is due
to appear soon [7], is disarmingly simple: it is a laser-like state where
matter and field oscillate in phase on a frequency that is characteristic of
the particular atomic/molecular species that make up a particular piece of
matter. But there are two fundamental differences:
i) the laser-like state, being the ground state, is accessed spontaneously with­
out any pump nor optical cavity, when it is below a critical temperature and
above a critical density;
ii) no e.m. radiation can escape from such a state for, being it the ground state,
this would violate energy conservation.

It turns out that with the kind of "oscillator strengths" (matter - e.m.
couplings), and the kind of densities ( (  )   1022 -;- 1023 cm-3) typical of
the atomic/molecular systems of condensed matter the critical tempera­
tures are usually very high ( 1000 K) and the critical densities are usually
well below 1023 cm-3• Thus such states are predicted by QED to occur
very frequently, as indeed they do! It should be abundantly clear, at this
7 As forcefully argumented by P.\V. Anderson in an influential book on condensed matter 
physics {6]. 
moment, that the doom of the paradigm, implied by such new develop­
ments, demands that it be replaced by the new approach, that is based 
on a solid ( through well defined approximations) analysis of the ground 
states of QED in condensed matter systems [5]. \Ve may call this new 
approach the electrodynamic Network (EN), for it involves the multi­
tudes of atoms/molecules of a macroscopic piece of matter in an intricate 
dynamical interplay mediated by a large amplitude ( classical) e.m. field. 

One of the basic aspects of the EN, that being very conterintuitive is 
most difficult to visualize, is the peculiar behaviour of the matter systems, 
which comprise well defined quantum wave fields, the matter wave fields. 

When we concentrate our attention upon the elementary matter systems it 
seems completely natural to think that when in the ground state they are 
in the lowest state of excitation, for this appears to be a straightforward 
consequence of energy minimization. This. in fact, turns out to be generally 
wrong for, due to the phase coherence between the matter field and the e.m. 
field, energy is minimized when both the electromagnetic and the matter 
fields are in an excited state, the (negative) interaction energy being suffi­
cient to bring the value of the total energy below that of the perturbative 
ground state, where both e.m. field and matter are indeed in their ground 
states. 

As I have stressed [8,9] time and again to the CF community since the 
first paper published in May 1989, the ground state of a piece of matter, 
say a Pd rod, is so crowded with large coherent e.m. 'fields that the idea 
that AF should hold there does not seem at all reasonable. Indeed one 
should carefully evaluate (and this has been done in successive steps [9]) if 
and in which way the expectations of AF are violated. However, one thing 
can already be said with certainty: AF is not a general property of the 
coherent ground states of QED in condensed matter. Thus, from a purely 
conceptual standpoint, in the new approach the "pathologies" of CF are 
completely cured, for they are all based on a general property, AF, that 
does not hold in a large class of physical solutions of QED, the coherent 
ground states (CGS). At this point one may conclude that the "pathology" 
of CF is in fact in the eye of the beholder! 

In an article written together with :M. Fleischmann and S. Pons [10] an 
articulate discussion was presented of the strange behaviour of Hydrogen 
in a metal matrix such as Pd, arguing that, even ignoring the phenomena 
of CF, what is well known since long about the way Hydrogen enters and 
diffuses in Pd is totally at odds with the paradigm, and its qualifying AF. 

In particular, the high potential barrier(  30 eV) that a Di-molecule must 
overcome before entering the Pd-lattice ( where, according to a series of fas­
cinating experiments of A. Coehn (11), Hydrogen is found in the ionized 
state) is something that within the paradigm has never found any sensible 
explanation. This and the many other mysteries that still remain to be un-
raveled in the Palladium/Hydrogen system, as we have argued in Ref. [10], 
should be another warning signal that one does have to go beyond the 
paradigm, even ignoring (but how?) the dry and reproducible facts of CF. 

Let me now devote the rest of this Section to paint a possible scenario 
of the Pd/D system at high loading (x =Pd/D), where the CF phenomena 
are known to occur. I shall do this in the framework of the new approach, 
whose conceptual bases have been described at length above, and whose 
calculational details have been worked out in several previous talks and 


reviews [12,13]8• 

The Pd-lattice ( a face centered cubic lattice) is the locus of several 
coherent dynamical processes, that give rise to coherent, collective plasma 
oscillations of the different elementary systems. Those in which we shall be 
mainly interested in are: 
i) the coherent plasma of the Pd-ions;
ii) the coherent plasma of the d-electrons;
iii) the coherent plasma of the conduction electrons.

These plasmas realize an energetic gain with respect to the (mono )atomic
high temperature gas, and such gain constitutes the previously ill-recognised 
"raison d'etre" of the crystalline structure of the metal. When the Pd-lattice 
is entered by the Hydrogen (and its isotopes D,T) atoms one finds that the 
electrons go to augment the conduction band, and the (partially screened) 
nuclei arrange themselves in particular sites ( octahedral and tetrahedral) 
(See Fig. 1), where they perform coherent, collective plasma oscillations. 

Again, it is the energy gain that is associated with the latter plasma oscil­
lations that justifies the incorporation of Hydrogen by the Pd-lattice, that 
in fact turns out to be exothermal ('.::::'. 15 Kcal/mole). Thus in the Pd/H 
system there is another all important plasma: 
iv) the coherent plasma of the (partially screened) H (D,T) nuclei.

As explained in Ref. [13) there are two types of H plasmas, according
to the sites the H-ions occupy: the ,B-plasma in the octahedral sites, and 
the ,-plasma in the tetrahedral sites. I have shown (and a more refined 
calculation [14] confirms it) that for x   x0 (x0   0.7) it is the ,0-plasma 
that realizes the ground state, while for x > x0 the ,-plasma possesses the 
minimum (free) energy. Thus on a purely theoretical basis it was concluded 
that a (second order) phase transition (from the ,B-phase in the octahedral 
sites to a new phase, called ,-phase, in the tetrahedral sites should occur for 
x   x0 • This prediction has now found many confirmations ranging from 
8This reasonably exonerates me from repeating what can be found in easily accessible 
literature. 

Figure 1: The octahedral sites (left) and the disks of the tetrahedal sites (right) 
in the (1,0,0) plane of the Pd lattice. 
the measurement of the x-dependence of the diffusion coefficient [15], to 
the peculiar resistivity curve of the Pd/H system, which shows a maximum 
at x0   0.7. The explanation of this latter well known fact is in the new 
approach quite simple and natural: the extra resistivity that, due to H 
incorporation, rises up to x0 and falls to zero for x -+ l, .reflects the different 
scattering cross-sections that the H-ions have for the conduction electrons; 
in particular the decrease for x > x0 indicates that in the 1-phase the H-ions 
are in a tightlier correlated state. 

In the talk I have given at the ICCF4 [13] I posed two sets of questions, 
relevant to the H-loading of Pd (a) and to the CF phenomena proper (/3). 

Let me recall them. 

First the questions about Hydrogen (D) loading: 
( a1) Why and how does the process 


D2 lgas -+ D + D !lattice 

proceed? 


(a2) why and how, in the lattice 

n+ and e- enjoying a different, independent dynamics? 
(a3) why is n+ so mobile at high x?
( a4) what are the phases of Pd/D? 
ii) 
iii) 
Figure 2: The steps of D2 absorption by the Pd-lattice. 
( a5) what happens during electrochemical loading? 
(a6) why one observes "Heat after death'' [16}? 

As for the mechanisms of CF in the highly loaded Pd/D system, the
relevant questions appear to be: 
(/3i) how can one overcome the Coulomb barrier?; 
(/32) which is the main DD-fusion dynamics?; 
(/33) can we understand rarer processes: n,T,X-rays ... ? 

Let me now briefly recall the answers. 
(ai) The process consist of two steps (see Fig. 2): 
(i) the Drmolecule is brought in contact with the Pd-surface; this step is
governed by the gas chemical potential:
T[ 


T 

µD2 = -2 19.3 + 4 Iog To - log pl 
Po ,
(ii) the D2-molecule interact with the evanescent e.m. field associated with
the different Pd-plasmas. It is the dispersive interaction of these co­
herent e.m. field that causes the tunneling of the Drmolecule through
the high barrier(  30 eV) that separates it from the ''shattered" state
(2D+ + 2e-) in which it starts penetrating the Pd-lattice. Incidentally, 
the same kind of interaction must be at work when the coherent e.m. 
field of water [17] induce the NaCl (ionic) molecules of a crystal of salt 
to tunnel through their barrier (about 5 eV high) to become ions: Na+ 
and c1-. 
(a:2) The D+ 's and the e-'s of the "shattered" deuterium surface state penetrate 
(almost) independently the Pd-lattice, for they belong to different plasmas, 
and there is an energetic gain to be part of the plasmas instead of remaining 
in the atomic configurations. 
( a3, a4) It all depends on the different phases a- /3- and 1- the n+ 's are in with 
increasing x. The a-phase is a disordered (gaslike) phase existing at x < 0.1; 
in this phase the diffusion coefficient is expected, and found, very small (see 
Fig. 3). The /3-phase is an ordered (coherent) phase with the D+'s oscillating 
in the octahedral sites. The ( calculated [14)) x-dependence of the chemical 
potentialµ for the /3- and the ,-phase (the D+'s in the tetrahedral sites) are 
reported in Fig. 4, which shows a cross-over at about x0 , implying that for 
x < Xo the stable phase is the /3-phase, while for x > x0 it is the ,-phase to 
be stable. Recalling now that the diffusion coefficient is given by 
where a is Einstein's mobility, from Fig. 3 we may understand two major 
features of the D +'s mobility in Pd: 
(i) its fast increase with x;
(ii) its sharp discontinuity for x ;.._,, x0• 
These deductions answer (a:3) and (a:4) completely. I should also remind you 
that the existence of the ,-phase, whose evidence is becoming compelling, 
was actually predicted on the grounds that CF cannot take place in the 
/3-phase for: 
(a) the D +'s are too far away;
(b) only the tetrahedral sites can accomodate more that one n+;
( c) only in the tetrahedral sites can the d-electrons of Pd effectively screen
Coulomb repulsion.

This is another good example of the fact that the remarkable oddities of CF 
have just shed interesting light upon the dynamics of an ancient, well known 
system such as Pd/H. 


-t 

X 

Figure 3: The diffusion coefficient of D in Pd as given by [15] 
n.5 -..------------------


-0.l   t     

.11.2 r

-'l.J ................................ ""'--'--'-'-'-.W.... '-'-'-....................................................... ...._._ ......... _._.__.........., 


II 

II.I 

O.J 

II.II 

l 

Figure 4: The chemical potential µ13 of the ,B-phase, compared with µ..., of the 
,-phase, as a function of x. 


GAS 

Figure 5: The different fates of D+'s arriving at the Pd-cathode. 
( o5, 06) The description of electrochemical loading that our approach affords takes 
off from the three possible fates ( depicted in Fig. 5) of the o+ -ions once they 
arrive at the cathode. How many of them will be able'to enter the Pd-lattice, 
and load it at high x (the fundamental prerequisite for CF phenomena to 
occur), it depends on: 
(i) how many D-atoms will combine on the Pd-surface and leave the premises
as Di-molecules, forming the.well visible gas bubbles;
(ii) the chemical potential of the D's left at the surface.

In order to minimize the number of D-atoms that bubble out as Dr molecules 
some kind of "muck", that forms during the electrolysis upon the surface, is 
certainly useful, for it hinders the free traffic of D-atoms on the surface and 
its consequent high recombination probability. As for the surface chemical 
potential a fairly detailed analysis of the ponderomotive effects due to the 
evanescent e.m. fields of the various plasmas of the Pd/D system has been 
presented at ICCF4 [13], showing interesting autocatalytic aspects. In fact, 
the surface, as well as the bulk chemical potentials acquire negative terms, 
whose absolute values increase with x, thus leading to large equilibrium x­
values, quite far away from thermodynamical equilibrium. 

As for "heat after death", the subtle interplay of surface and bulk chemi­
cal potentials at high x is capable to account for the strange observations 
reported by S. Pons at ICCF4 [16] 

► 200 ,----------------  

l O 

t, 
Figure 6: The electrostatic potential as seen by the D+'s along the tetrahedral disks

Getting now to the CF phenomena in the highly loaded Pd/D system,
I will now sketchily9 answer the questions posed above,in order.
(/31 ) The screening that the plasma of d-electrons provides in the tetrahedral sites
has been determined by calculating the electrostatic potential generated by
them, which is reported in Fig. 6.

Introducing such screening potentJal in the Gamow barrier penetration am­
plitude(µ= T is the reduced mass of the D-D system)
T/G ~ exp {-(2µ)1l21: dr'[V(r') - E] 1l2}, 

yields

TJa(Pd) ~ 10-22±1, 
some thirty orders bigger than the amplitude in the Drmolecule rya(DD) ~
10-51• This very strong screening is enough to yield rates for the purely
incoherent processes (the only one that takes place in vacuum)
rlNc = l11a12rNUCL   lO(x - 1) fusions/sec cm3,
where the (x - 1) factor takes into account the threshold at x = 1, a strict
prediction of this approach.
9 Again, extended answers are found in the ICCF4 talk (13] 
(/32, /33) The main fusion path is not, of course, the incoherent one, that is the only
fusion mechanism in the vacuum, and would be the only one in Pd as well,
should AF hold, as dictated by the paradigm.

The new approach, in fact, predicts that the strong e.m. fields that crowd the
lattice, once the barrier is penetrated, couple the extra D-nuclei (i.e. those in
excess of x = I) to the wave-field comprising all deuterons within a coherence
domain10, of the size of a few microns. Due to the Nev factor, arising from
coherence, and the strength of the e.m. fields, the nuclear dynamics becomes
strong and fast, leading to the nuclear ground state 4He with high probability
and in a very short time. This is why:


(i) the main fusion channel is

o+ + o+ ➔ 4 He+ energy in Pd;
(ii) the energy released to the Pd-lattice brings the various coherent fields
in excited states that relax with their particular times ( 2;, w is the
oscillation frequency) in various forms:
a) e.m. radiations of all frequencies,
b) exotic nuclear photo-reactions, including neutrons from the photofis­
sion of D,
c) heat, i.e. phonons.
(iii) in regions where the coherence is partial, we may have different, weaker
and longer pathways (Fig. 7), which may explain the odd ( T) ratios
that have been observed.
(iv) a (semi)quantitative calculation of the main fusion channel on the case
of "minimal" coherence (i.e. coherence over only one CD) yields for
x ~ 1.1 rates of the order of kW /cm3 Pd. Much higher rates are
expected for higher x-values and more extended coherence.

To conclude this Section, I believe I may state with confidence that on
the basis of the accumulated body of observations and of the theoretical
work done so far:
(a) a good, predictive, sound theory of the "pathologies" of CF can be based on
the general laws of QED, liberated at last from the crippling constraints of
Asymptotic Freedom;
(/3) the science of CF is just in its infancy, other promising systems, besides
the Pd/D are now coming to the fore and even in the Pd/D system there
lO As I have explained, almost "ad nauseam" on several different occasion, the minimum space
domain in which the matter and the e.m. fields are coherent is the Coherence Domain (CD}, 
whose size is the wave-length of the e.m. field. 

Figure 7: The level diagram for the states involved in the dynamical evolution 
described in the text. Also reported is Schwinger's 4He*. 
are large areas of experimentation where a new chemistry, a new condensed 
matter and a new nuclear physics are very likely to emerge, fostered by the 
power and the simplicity of the new, coherent approach. 


What's wrong with this?: a reply to 1ny critics 

I may concede that I never, since my long scientific militance in the camp 
of CF, expressed so explicitly to this community the need for the drastic 
paradigm shift that the CF phenomenology demands. The new approach 
- QED coherence in matter11 - just realizes such paradigm shift by iden­
tifying in the neglect of the transverse e.m. field in condensed matter a
fatal drawback of the dominant paradigm and of its fundamental conse­
quence: Asymptotic Freedom. In hindsight this was a mistake, for very
few scientists (fortunately Fleischmann among them) have perceived the
logical cogency of the various deductions that form the body of an in prin­
ciple (to go frorri. principle to practice will require substantially more work)
complete theory of CF, both with regard to the fascinating problems of
Hydrogen loading in a metal matrix such as Pd, and to the CF phenomena
in such metal/D systems.

As a matter of fact what in my work most people have incorrectly under­
stood, and criticized, is a collection of more or less "imaginative" models to 
fix the various "miracles" of CF, that to a closer scrutiny within the frame 
of prejudices and constraints of the paradigm end up (is it so surprising?) 
to violate one or other of its tenets. 

I shall illustrate this important point by analyzing and answering the 
most explicit critiques12 that have been levied against my work, which ap­
pear in the ICCF4 Proceedings [18),· and in a review article published in a 
recent issue of the International Journal of Theoretical Physics [19]. 

The hostile attitude of the authors toward my work is betrayed by their 
complaint that Dicke, the inventor of Superradiance, is never mentioned 
in the CF papers. As mentioned in a footnote above, though Dicke's Su­
perradiance leads to ordered quantum states of matter and radiation that 
have some common feature with those of QED coherence in matter, their 
distinctive feature of producing coherent e.m. radiation (like in a laser) is 
just orthogonal to the e.m. field trapping within matter, that gets realized 
in the new approach when the density of the atomic/molecular systems is 
11 In a first stage I gave this approach the name of Superradiance, as a due homage to the 
pioneering work of R.H. Dicke. This was a mistake, for my generosity has been maliciously taken 
as a plagiarism. But more of this in a moment. 
12To be fair, I should credit these critics the basic honesty of speaking out their disagreement: 
a practice that is less and less popular in the contemporary scientific world, for it exposes the 
critic himself to critiques. The more frequent and safer practice makes use of gossips and of 
anonymous referee reports. 
large enough and their temperature low enough. It is just for these reasons 
that Dicke has been fully mentioned in other papers and lectures, his work 
being totally unrelated to the subtle phenomenology of CF. 

Their hostility is further displayed in their accusing me of conceptual 
errors, that they do not care to argue, and of "a number" of numeric and 
analytic mistakes, of which they discuss only a minor one ( about a factor 
of 5 in a Gamow amplitude ~ 10-21, whose evaluation can clearly not be 
more accurate than one order of magnitude!). 

But, enough with such pettiness; their really strong critique has to do 
with the large screening potential (½crccn ~ 100 eV at the bottom of the 
well) derived in Ref. [9], and further refined in subsequent calculations [14]. 

Incidentally, without such screening there is no (known) way to understand 
how CF phenomena could happen. 

Having taken the original calculation to mean that the Z electrons of 
the Pd atom surround the D+ -ion at distances of the order of the Fermi­
Thomas radius for a Z electron atom, they conclude that all this violates 
basic physics, for "a solid would collapse if such close equilibrium screening 
were possible". 

Their turn of arguments would not be blatantly incorrect if the screening 
electrons ( only the d-electrons, as realistically done since march 1990 [9)) 
were in static orbits around the Pd-nucleus. But, as stressed time and again, 
such electrons comprise a plasma performing wide plaspi.a oscillations, that 
realize an energy gain. In such state, due to the strong correlations among 
them, the electrons do not behave incoherently and individually, as they 
do in the atom, but follow their collective dynamics, which endows them 
with much sharper localization properties, as if their effective mass ( their 
inertia) were in fact larger than in the 'asymptotically free" limit. For the 
sake of visualization only, one may think that the electrons tend to mimic 
the physics of µ-catalysis. Clearly, the misunderstanding has its origin in 
the critics' lack of perception that QED coherence in matter does change 
the paradigm, whose conceptual schemes are totally inadequate to penetrate 
collective behaviour, that, instead, is at the root of the new approach. 

Finally the critique [18] that I violate the laws of physics "in trying to 
insure a large enough time for the existence of a large charge density on 
the sides of a crack". Again it is their poor understanding of the paradigm 
shift that is realized by the new approach that blurs the critics' perception 
of what I am trying to do in the different field of "fractofusion". The 
coherent e.m. fields that in the form of evanescent waves fill the crack of 
a mechanically stimulated solid may have rather large lifetimes, and it is 
they, and not a large density of electrostatic charges that are responsible 
for the acceleration (under appropriate conditions) of the charged particles 
that move across the cracks. 

These are the only critiques that I find in the literature to the body of 
my work on CF, and so my reply should end here. 

But, in the CF community, there are other more serious critiques, or 
better (worse!) the widespread belief that we do not, after six years, possess 
the correct intellectual means to understand CF. This refrain occurs over 
and over in all published literature, which most of the time ignores all that 
has been done in the new approach since March 1989. What kind of answer 
can I give to such vast majority of believers of CF, but skeptics of CF 
theory? I have thought a lot about ths problem, that I have always seen as 
a major obstacle to quick progress in this fascinating field. Philosophy, or 
better epistemology, clearly has not worked, for the conceptual superiority 
of the new approach should have convinced my colleagues to invest some of 
their time to try and understand it, and contribute better critiques to the 
development of the associated research program. The discussion it affords 
of general different and subtle mechanisms that give a completely coherent 
picture of the CF phenomena in the Pd/D system also has had little impact 
due, I presume,- to the philosophical barrier just described. Let me try a 
new (though at this time subliminal) way. I can tell you with a reasonable 
degree of confidence that proceeding on the road built by the new approach 
through CF land one should be able to reproducibly achieve powers in the 
order of 100 kW /cm3 Pd. 

It is reasonable that all this will be common knowledge by the time of 
ICCF6. 


References 

(l] T. Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (Chicago Univ. Press, 
Chicago, 1962). 
[2] D.J. Gross, F. Wilczek, Phys. Rev. D9 (1973) 1343.
[3] G. Preparata, Nuovo Cim. 107 A (1994) 2657.
[4] G. Preparata, Nuovo Cim. 96A (1986) 366.
(5] G. Preparata, in "Problems of Fundamental Modern Physics", R. Cherubini, 
P. Dalpiaz and B. Minetti eds. (World Scientific, Singapore, 1990).
[6] P.W. Anderson, Basic Notions of Condensed Matter Physics (Benjamin­
Curnmings, Menlo Park (Ca), 1984).
[7] G. Preparata, QED Coherence in Condensed Matter (World Scientific, Singa­
pore, 1995).
[8] T. Bressani, E. Del Giudice, G. Preparata Nuovo Cim. 101A (1989) 845.
[9] G. Preparata, Proc. First Annual conference on Cold Fusion, Salt Lake City,
Utah, March 28-31 (1990) 130.
(10] M. Fleischmann, S. Pons, G. Preparata, Nuovo Cim. 105A (1992) 763. 
[11] A. Cohen, Z. Electrochem. 35 (1929) 676.
[12] G. Preparata, Towards a theory of Cold Fusion Phenomena, Proc Rome Work-
shop of Cold Fusion in Italy, B. Stella ed. (Roma: 1993).
(13) G. Preparata, Transactions of fusion technology, 26 (1994) 397.
[14) G. Preparata and F. Taddei, in preparation. 
[15] G. Mengoli et al., J. Electroanal. Chem. 57 (1989) 350.
[16] M. Fleischmann, S. Pons, Transactions of fusion technology, 26 (1994) 87.
[17] R. Arani et al., QED coherence and the therodynamics of water, preprint
MITH 93/3 (Milano 1993).
[18] M. Rabinowitz et al., Transactions of fusion technology, 26 (1994) 3.
[19] V.A. Chechin et al., Int. Journ. Theor. Phys. 3 (1994) 617.
