INTRODUCTION

The recent announcement of electrochemically induced nuclear fusion [1,2] has
generated great interest and activity within the scientific community. In particular,
there are several aspects related to the work of ref. 1 which are not fully understood
and therefore deserve further investigation. One of them is the huge discrepancy
between the amount of measured heat and the intensity of the supposedly accompanying nuclear radiation, namely neutrons and gamma rays. In view of the fact that
the detection of nuclear radiation in the context of an electrochemical process is
perhaps the most unequivocal fingerprint for the occurrence of fusion, we feel that a
careful re-evaluation of the measurement conditions may be needed.
In order to address this question, in the present paper we report on an attempt to
observe this phenomenon and on the possible problems related to the detection
techniques. 


EXPERIMENTAL 

Electrochemical conditions
The cell used in this work (shown in Fig. 1) was a glass vessel 14 cm high and 11
cm in diameter. The cathode was a 4 mm diameter Pd rod (purity 99.97%) of 4 cm
length, ending as a wire of 1 mm in diameter through a conical shape. It was blasted
with glass microspheres and washed with a H,SO, + HF solution and subsequently
palladized by electrolysis in a 1% PdCI, solution at 4 V for 5 min. After drying, it
was degassed at 470°C in vacuum for 90 min, and after reaching 120 o C, the
vacuum line was filled with D, and allowed to reach room temperature.
The electrolysis was carried out with 0.1 A4 LiOD in 40 99.5% and 0.5% H,O
(0.5 M LiOD was prepared as a stock solution by dissolving Li in D,O in an inert
atmosphere.) 

Fig. 1. Scheme of the electrolytic cell. (1) Working electrode; (2) counter electrode;
electrode; (4), (5) thermistors; (6) N, inlet; (7) Dz inlet; (8) D,O inlet; (9) level reference.

D,O was reactor quality with a small tritium impurity (8 pCi/l). All other
chemicals were analytical grade.
Electrolytically generated D2 was used only during the high current density
portions of the experiment (256 and 512 mA cme2) in order to stir the solution. A
flux of N, was used above the liquid phase, to avoid D, and 0, accumulation.
The cathode potential was measured versus the Pd/D (a-/3 phase) reference
electrode. To avoid overheating of the solution due to the Joule effect, the cell was
placed in the center of a cylindrical container, 25 cm in diameter, which was used to
provide a circulating light water bath. Different current densities were applied
according to the sequence shown in Fig. 3 below. 

y-ray measurements
To establish an eventual emission of neutrons (n) coming from the Pd electrode
and originating in a nuclear reaction like e.g.:
d + d d3He (0.82 MeV) + n (2.45 MeV)
a measurement was started aimed at detecting y-rays produced by the radiative
capture reaction of the neutrons by the protons of the medium. In fact, if the
electrolytic cell is surrounded by materials of high hydrogen content (like H,O or
paraffin), the fast 2.45 MeV neutrons are thermalized by successive elastic collisions
with the protons, and finally absorbed in the reaction: 
n + p + d + y (2223.3 keV) (2) 

The energy of this y-radiation is high enough to reach the detector without
suffering a significant attenuation after traversing the moderating material. In
addition, this y line has a distinctive feature as compared to other lines stemming
from transitions between discrete levels in radioactive nuclei. It has a measurable
natural line width of about 4 keV since it depopulates the relatively short lived
capture state. However for this feature to show up it is necessary to utilize an
instrument of sufficiently high energy resolution. In the present work a hyperpure
germanium detector of 30% relative efficiency and a resolution of about 2.2 keV at
1332 keV has been used. The resolution of this detector at ca. 2.2 MeV, is about 25
times better than that of the NaI counter employed in ref. 1, as judged from the
y-ray spectrum shown there

In order to increase the efficiency for neutron moderation, the outer cylindrical
container of about 25 cm diameter was surrounded by a paraffin layer of about 25
cm thickness and 40 cm height, and by a lead brick wall of about 5 cm thickness to
provide shielding against external background y-radiation. The detector, looking
radially towards the Pd electrode, was inside this set-up and separated from the wall
of the light water container by a paraffin layer of about 5 cm (meaning that the
sensitive volume of the detector was completely surrounded by paraffin and also
partly by lead). The upper and lower parts of the light water container were open to
allow the manipulation of the cell and the neutron measurement, respectively (see
below). The size and geometry of the paraffin enclosure were varied in order to
optimize the detector efficiency to measure neutrons originated at the Pd electrode’s
position using for this determination a 252Cf fission source of ca. 2 X lo4 n/s placed
there (incidentally, the source intensity coincides with the neutron flux reported in
ref. 1). This source has a spectrum of fast neutrons with an average energy of 2.35
MeV. The absolute efficiency was determined to be (1.6 f 0.4) X 10e5. This value is
about a factor 7 higher than the neutron counter efficiency reported in ref. 1.

The background radiation was studied carefully during periods of several days,
using the same geometry and simulating the real experimental conditions by
running the electrolytic cell with light water and a Pt electrode. This in-situ
background determination is very important since it varies significantly within the
same building. Some relevant y-ray spectra are displayed in Fig. 2. Figure 2a shows
for reference the 2.223 MeV line produced by neutrons from the 252Cf source.
Figure 2b is a spectrum taken during a 50 h Pd/D,O run whereas Fig. 2c
corresponds to the background spectrum. Of particular interest is a line of 2.2045
MeV produced in the decay of *14Bi for *14Po belonging to the natural radioactive
series of 238U which is only separated by about 19 keV from the capture y-ray. 

Fig. 2. (a) The y-ray spectrum recorded with the 2s2 Cf source; (b) relevant portion of the y-ray spectrum
recorded during the electrolysis; (c) as (b) but for the background recorded during 38 h immediately after
the electrolysis. The energies of the identified peaks are in keV

These two lines cannot be resolved by a NaI detector such as the one used in ref. 1,
and their possible unfolding should be considered carefully.
After background subtraction, the results obtained here from spectrum b allow us
to set an upper limit of about 13 n/s (averaged over the whole experiment) for the
neutron production rate, which is more than three orders of magnitude less than the
result reported in ref. 1. 

Neutron measurements
The neutron detection system consisted of two boron trifluoride (BF,) proportional counters, placed under the electrolytic cell at approximately 50 cm from the
Pd electrode. The system was calibrated introducing the 252Cf neutron source in
place of the Pd electrode. The intrinsic efficiency for neutrons was estimated to be about 1 neutron detected of every 800 neutrons passing through each detector. The
absolute efficiency of the system (i.e., including geometric factors) was determined
to be 1.45 x 10B5. The counters provided logic signals that were computer-accumulated every minute in a multi-channel scaling mode. The counting of each
detector was recorded individually every hour using two scalers. Data acquisition
was started 26 h before the electrolysis, and continued up to 50 h after it was
stopped. The neutron yield corresponding to the whole experiment of 136 h,
integrated in eight-hour intervals, is shown in Fig. 3. The histogram in the bottom
part of the figure represents the current density applied to the electrolytic cell as a
function of time, the height of the bars being proportional to the current density.
The full and dashed lines indicate the average and the standard deviations (plus and
minus) of the experimental points of the background. The left background (hours 0
to 26) was taken under the same conditions as those of the experiments except for
the electrolysis, and the right background was measured during an electrolysis of
H,O using a Pt cathode and a constant current density of 10 mA/cm*. 
Fig. 3. Neutron yield integrated in 8-h bins as a function of time (0). The histogram at the bottom
represents the applied current densities which are indicated by the numbers on top (in mA/cm’). 

When considering the total interval corresponding to the electrolysis of D,O in
comparison with the totality of the measured background, an excess rate of 13 f 11
n/s is estimated using the absolute detection efficiency quoted above. This number
is in good agreement with that deduced from the y-ray measurement. If one takes
the 8-h interval corresponding to the only point whose error bars fall completely
outside the band determined by the background measurements, the determined
excess rate for neutron production rises to 50 + 23 n/s. Therefore, the upper limit
for neutron production in our experiment is about three orders of magnitude lower
than the rates reported in ref. 1. 


CONCLUSIONS

An electrolysis of D,O on a Pd cathode has been performed with the aim of
observing electrochemically induced nuclear fusion. The simultaneous measurement of y-rays and neutrons yields a consistent upper limit for the production rate of
fusion reactions which is about three orders of magnitude lower than that reported
in ref. 1. The high energy-resolution measurements of the emitted y-rays performed
in the present work reveal the presence of a background line of 2204.5 keV which
may be difficult to unfold in a low resolution experiment. 


REFERENCES

1 M. Fleischmann and S. Pons, J. Electroanal. Chem., 261 (1989) 301; err. ibid., 263 (1989) 187.
2 S.E. Jones, E.P. Palmer, J.B. Czirr, D.L. Decker, G.L. Jensen, J.M. Thome, S.F. Taylor and J. Rafelski,
Brigham Young University and University of Arizona, preprint March 23,1989; Nature (London), 338
(1989) 737. 


