Inert gases are virtually insoluble in metals; upon introduction into a metal (e.g., by ion implantation) they
precipitate and form microvoids or "bubbles. " At ambient temperature, these inert-gas bubbles grow by
athermal processes rather than by absorption of thermal
vacancies. Hence the growth process is driven by gas
pressure, which is thus considerably greater than the
equilibrium pressure (=1 GPa) required to balance the
surface tension of the bubble. Transmission-electronmicroscopy (TEM) studies showing bubbles of solid Xe
and Ar in Al at room temperature, '
and solid-to-gas transitions of Kr in Ni and in Cu above 600 K provide
dramatic evidence for the existence of highly overpressur ized bubbles. The greatest technological interest,
though, is with He in metals, which has a fairly extensive
literature. Unfortunately, because of the low-scattering
power of He, TEM has not provided information on the
physical state of He within bubbles. uv-absorptionspectroscopy studies suggest that He bubbles in Al
solidify upon cooling to about 150 K, but the current
overall picture for the density and physical state of He in
metals —based on a variety of experimental techniques
is confused, with a wide range of reported densities
and no clear evidence for a solid-to-gas transition.

Nuclear-magnetic-resonance (NMR) studies of bulk
He show that while atomic exchange is important for
relaxation in the bcc structure, it is inconsequential for
pressures above about 10 MPa (where the solid is hcp).
In the latter case, modulation of the dipolar interaction
by vacancy motion dominates He spin relaxation. The
temperature dependence of the spin-lattice relaxation
time (T~) is here well described by the classical Bloembergen, Purcell, and Pound (BPP) formulation, exhibiting the characteristic (frequency dependent) minimum.
When melting occurs, Tl increases by 2 to 3 orders of
magnitude, thus providing a clear indication of the phase
change. The observed bulk relaxation behavior suggests
that He relaxation-time measurements might yield
valuable information relating to the physical state and
dynamics of He within bubbles, provided that NMR sensitivity limitations can be overcome and that the bulk
mechanisms are not obscured by wall effects. Ion implantation of He can be used to prepare samples for NMR investigation, '
but it is difficult to attain an adequate total spin count. An alternate approach is to synthesize a metal hydride with use of tritium ( H, which
decays with a half-life of about twelve years, giving He
as a stable product). This latter method provides homogeneous He deposition and avoids the direct displacement damage caused by ion implantation. 
However, it
requires handling hazardous radioactive material and
waiting for a sufficient number of He spins to form.
Previous NMR studies of He in metal tritides
provide very little information about the physical state of
He, but these studies were limited to older samples
where appreciable release of He from the lattice had occurred, presumably a consequence of extensive lattice
damage. Ideally, one would like to study a metal tritide
old enough to give a He-spin count sufficient for practical NMR signal-averaging methods, yet not so old that
He release is occurring. Depending on the tritium density of the NMR sample, 5-15 months of aging should
satisfy these criteria.

This article presents NMR evidence, relating to He
produced by triton decay in 1-yr-old palladium tritide,
for a BPP minimum below 200 K and for a solid-fluid
phase transition in the range 200-280 K. Palladium is
an ideal system for the present study because (i) the
physical properties of palladium hydride have been
thoroughly investigated, '
(ii) the magnetic properties of
Pd nuclei (small gyromagnetic ratios) and of bulk palladium hydride (small magnetic susceptibility) should simplify interpretation of He NMR measurements, (iii)
pressure-composition-temperature characterization of
the Pd- H system is fairly extensive, and (iv) TEM imaging of He bubbles in 66-day-old Pd H06 provides information about bubble size and density.

The Pd material used in the present study consists of
spherical particles in the size range 75-150 pm. Chemical analysis reveals insignificant concentrations ((10at.
ppm) of possible paramagnetic impurities (0, Fe, Mn).
Preliminary proton T& measurements on a protide of this
Pd show that dilution with an insulator (A1203) has little
effect on signal intensity per gram of Pd. Thus, 2.42 g of
undiluted Pd was placed in an NMR sample tube (this
gave near-optimum filling within the coil region), loaded
with about 0.1-MPa tritium gas, and stored at room
temperature. The initial composition was determined
from P V -Tm-easurements to be [ H]/[Pd] =0.62.
NMR spin-counting techniques show only about 30% of
the expected total number of H spins in the sample.
This shortfall is due to skin effect' (the particle diameters are 2-3 times the skin depth at 25 MHz).
Signihcantly, though, the He- to H-spin ratio after one
year of aging agrees closely with the predicted ratio, implying that the He NMR results described below are
representative of all the He born in the lattice. (The
NMR system used in the present study has been described elsewhere. ')

Figure 1 shows the temperature dependence of T] and
Tq (spin-spin) relaxation times at a Larmor frequency of'
25 M Hz for He in 1-yr-old Pd Ho 6z. The abrupt
change in T~ near 220 K, by almost 1 order of magnitude, is strong evidence for a phase transition. Actually,
there is a region of coexistence between 200 and 280 K
where the time dependence of the magnetization
recovery is well described by a sum of two exponentials
corresponding to varying relative amounts of the two
phases. (Analogous behavior has been observed '
near the melting point for bulk He. ) Outside the coexistence
region, the recovery is ostensibly exponential. The observed range of melting temperatures (T ) is considerably larger than what would be expected for isochoric
melting of He at a single density'; it most. likely reflects
a distribution of densities for the ensemble of bnbbles.
From the observed melting curve' for bulk He between 1100 and 350 K, we infer bubble pressures ranging from
6.0 to 11.0 GPa corresponding to 200 & T & 280 K.
Using a high-pressure equation of state developed' for
He (the isotope effect is small' ), we obtain from these
bubble pressures a range of densities from 0. 18 to 0.22
mole/cm . The ratio of He atoms to host-atom vacancies (given by the product of He density with the hostatom volume for Pd H06q, where the latter quantity is
assumed to be the same as that for the corresponding
protide' ) is found to be 2.0+ 0.2. This ratio is in good
agreement with results for He in Ta H„based on dilatometry measurements, '
and also with a recent theoretical prediction, thereby supporting our interpretation.
The low-temperature phase in Fig. 1 shows a distinct
minimum for T~, by analogy with bulk hcp He, we attribute this to He-vacancy difTusion in solid He. T] results at 45.7 MHz (not shown) are qualitatively consistent with the predictions of BPP theory concerning
frequency dependence (i.e. the minimum shifts to higher temperature and the magnitude of T~ near the minimum
scales with frequency). BPP analysis of the low
temperature 25-MHz T] data yields the He jump frequency (r, ') results shown in Fig. 1, and an activation
energy for He-vacancy motion (W) of 370 ~ 40 K
(0.032 eV). The T2 data shown in Fig. 1 give a value for
W of 330~ 100 K. According to BPP theory, the magnitude of T~ at the minimum is proportional to density
squared (with a proportionality constant nearly independent of structure) ';this relationship gives a 'He density of about 0.13 mole/cm . The discrepancy between the
He density obtained from the BPP analysis and that
from T is not surprising, given that the observed distribution of densities implies a distribution of activation energies for vacancy diffusion. It can be easily demonstrated that in such a case, BPP analysis of T~ and Tp
based on the assumption of a single density will substantially underestimate both mean density and mean activation energy. Moreover, for reasonable distributions, relaxation times will appear exponential over the limited
range of experimentally accessible sampling intervals for
magnetization recovery. Measurement of the dipolar
rigid-lattice second moment ' would provide a more
direct NMR determination of mean density. However,
this will require liquid-helium temperatures and improved receiver recovery characteristics. Using the
present determination of mean density for He within
bubbles, together with the bubble density obtained from
a TEM study' of 66-day-old Pd Ho 6 (there is evidence
that in Zr H& 6, bubble density saturates within one or
two months '), we obtain for 1-yr-old Pd Ho6q, a mean
bubble diameter of 4 nm and a mean bubble occupancy
of 4x 10 atoms.

Figure 2 shows W and T as a function of molar
volume and compares the present results with results
from an NMR study of bulk hcp He. There is evidence that for vacancy diffusion W scales with T;
however, direct proportionality over the range of T
shown in Fig. 2 would be surprising. As discussed earlier, though, the magnitude of W obtained in the present
study is probably a lower bound, so that the true scaling
is more nearly linear than depicted. At any rate, the important point of Fig. 2 is the correlation of properties of
He in palladium tritide with those of bulk He, which
provides strong support for our interpretation of the
NMR data shown in Fig. l. If the present interpretation
is essentially correct, then Fig. 2 represents a remarkable
range of molar volumes for which information about He
dynamics in solid He is available.


'A. vom Felde, J. Fink, Th. Muller-Heinzerling, J. PViiger,
B. Scheerer, G. Linker, and D. Kaletta, Phys. Rev. Lett. 53,
922 (1984).
~J. H. Evans and D. J. Mazey, J. Phys. F 15, L1 (1985).
3S. E. Donnelly, Radiat. Eff'. 90, I (1985).
4S. E. Donnelly, A. A. Lucas, J. P. Vigneron, and J. C. Rife,
Radiat. Eff'. 78, 337 (1983).
5A. Abragam and M. Goldman, nuclear Magnetism: Order
and Disorder (Clarendon, Oxford, 1982), Chap. 3.
N. Sullivan, G. Deville, and A. Landesman, Phys. Rev. B
11, 1858 (1975).
N. Bloembergen, E. M. Purcell, and R. V. Pound, Phys.
Rev. 73, 679 (1948); for application of BPP to bulk He, see
D. S. M iyoshi, R. M. Cot ts, A. S. Green berg, and R. C.
Richardson, Phys. Rev. A 2, 870 (1970).
s'H. A. Reich, Phys. Rev. 129, 630 (1963).
R. L. Garwin and A. Landesman, Phys. Rev. 133, A1503
(1964).
'R. C. Bowman, Jr., and A. Attalla, Phys. Rev. B 16, 1828
(1977).
R. C. Bowman, Jr., Nature 271, 531 (1978).
'OH. T. Weaver and W. Beezhold, J. Nucl. Mater. 53, 346
(1974).
''R. Lasser, J. Less Common Met. 131, 263 (1987), and
references therein.
' H. T. Weaver and W. J. Camp, Phys. Rev. B 12, 3054
(1975).
'3G. Alefeld and J. Volkl, Hydrogen in Metals J and /I
(Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1978).
' G. J. Thomas and J. M. Mintz, J. Nucl. Mater. 116, 336
(1983).
'5D. Kotzur, M. Mehring, and 0. Kanert, Z. Naturforsch. A
28, 1607 (1973).
' P. Loubeyre, J. M. Besson, J. P. Pinceaux, and J. P. Hansen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 49, 1172 (1982).
' R. L. Mills, D. H. Liebenberg, and J. C. Bronson, Phys.
Rev. B 21, 5137 (1980).
'~R. L. Mills and E. R. Grilly, Phys. Rev. 99, 480 (1955).
'9T. Schober, R. Lasser, J. Golczewski, C. Dicker, and
H. Trinkaus, Phys. Rev. B 31, 7109 (1985).
W. G. Wolfer, to be published.
T. Schober, i n Hp drogen in Disordered and Amorphous
5olids, edited by G. Bambakidis and R. C. Bowman, Jr. (Plenum, New York, 1986), p. 377
R. A. Hultsch and R, G. Barnes, Phys. Rev. 125, 1832
(1962)
