I. INTRODUCTION

Although the helium isotopes 3He and He are extremely insoluble in metals, large quantities of these inert
atoms can be introduced into metals via ion implantation
or nuclear transmutation of tritium in a metal tritide (tritium decays with a half-life of about twelve years, giving
3He as a stable product). A considerable body of experimental and theoretical work has been done on the behavior of helium in metals' and metal-tritium systems.
The retention of He to levels of about 0.2-0.3 heliumto-metal atomic ratios has been observed for several metal
tritides before any significant release from the solid
occurs. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and
transmission electron microscopy (TEM) measurements
clearly indicate that essentially all of this
helium is trapped in small (i.e., diameters ( 10 nm) gas
bubbles. Evidence for very high internal pressures (5-10
GPa) in these bubbles is provided by swelling studies of
TaT, and NbT, (Refs. 3 and 4) and, more directly, by
NMR studies' of He spin-lattice relaxation in PdT,
showing a solid-to-Auid transition near 250 K. A theoretical mechanism for the spontaneous formation of helium
bubbles in metals from small clusters of interstitial He
atoms is supported by various experiments. ' The
highly overpressurized gas bubbles grow by punching out
dislocation loops, which in turn alter the mechanical
properties and microstructure of the host material.
Ultimately, helium release can occur when the chemical
potential for helium atoms in bubbles approaches that for
interstitial helium, or when stress from bubbles exceeds
the tensile strength of the deformed host lattice to produce
irreversible rupture of bubbles as they reach critical dimensions.

It has been recently reported
that ambient-temperature fusion reactions involving hydrogen isotopes
occur in a Pd electrode during electrolytic charging from
D20 solutions. Although confirmation of this "cold fusion" phenomena remains elusive, significant quantities
of helium isotopes should be produced if fusion actually
occurs. In fact, one group has claimed that a significant
concentration of He atoms was found in the gases
evolved from Pd metal in an electrolytic cell which was
producing excess heat attributed to fusion. However,
Lewis etal. have strongly dismissed such claims; instead, they argue that the detected helium results from
high backgrounds in the laboratory enviorment or errors
during measurement. ' A critical presumption apparently
made by Pons and Hawkins' is that any helium generated within the interior of the Pd-metal electrode is readily
evolved. But experimental studies of either helium implanted Pd films' or aged PdT„(Refs. 10-12, and 19) indicate that little of the helium would have been released
from the electrolysis cells during operation.

In previous work, ' PdT„powder was found to retain
essentially all of the helium generated by tritium decay
during ambient-temperature storage for over 1300 days
(i.e., [He]/[Pdl ratio ~0.1). Thomas and Mintz" observed bubbles with diameters 1.5-2.0 nm and a density
of about (5-10)x 102 bubbles/m3 in their TEM images
of Pd foil that had aged 66 days in the tritide phase (i.e.,
[T]/[Pd] ~0.6). NMR measurements'e'2 of the 3He
concentrations and relaxation times in aged PdT„samples
also indicated that helium retention is primarily in bubbles and that the density of helium atoms in the bubbles is
extremely high; moreover, little (if any) helium escapes
the solid when PdT„ is stored at ambient temperature.

The present article provides additional information concerning helium release from PdT„. Specifically, it has
been found that under conditions of ambient-temperature
storage, nearly all the helium born in the solid is retained
up to a saturation concentration of [He]/[Pd] =0.5.
Furthermore, thermal-desorption experiments show that
temperatures appreciably greater than 1300 K are required to release the trapped helium when [He]/[Pd]


II. EXPERIMENTAL

Four diNerent experiments are described in this paper:
(i) ambient-temperature helium release from PdT„as a
function of age; (ii) release via thermal desorption (TD)
to 1373 K from a PdT sample with [He]/[Pd] 50.3; (iii)
release via TD to 1273 K from a PdT„sample with
[He]/[Pd] 0.02; and (iv) total helium determination via
vaporization of a portion of the material from experiment
(iii). It should be noted that in the context of these experiments, the relevant measure of age is the concentration of
He in the Pd material.

The ambient-temperature release data comes from a
long-term storage program initiated in 1972 at Mound.
Well-characterized palladium powder, mixed with material that is inert with respect to palladium and hydrogen under the conditions of the study, was loaded into metal containers similar to those described elsewhere and tritided
to a known composition. These sample containers allow
periodic sampling of the gas phase whereby a small aliquot is removed to a known volume, with pressure and
temperature measurements followed by mass spectrometric analysis. A known amount of tritium is occasionally added to the container to replace that lost by
decay and by gas-phase sampling. This program included
three storage containers, all maintained at ambient temperature. Figure 1 shows the helium retention data obtained from the three storage samples. The ratio of helium to tritium in the solid (the retention ratio), together
with the cumulative helium release fraction (defined as total helium released relative to total helium born in the
solid), are shown as a function of storage age. The major
feature of Fig. I is the dramatic change after about 5000
days in the retention behavior. The retention ratio increases nearly linearly up to this time and then saturates
at a value of about 0.8. The cumulative release fraction
mirrors this behavior; viz. ,
the helium release fraction
remains below -5% for -5000 days and then increases
fairly abruptly to 25-30%. This behavior corresponds to
the onset of "accelerated release" (Refs. 3-&) reported for
several other metal tritides. The helium concentration
[He]/[Pd] is not shown in Fig. 1; it cannot be precisely
determined because the tritium stoichiometry [T]/[Pd] varied somewhat during storage. However, [T]/[Pd] was
maintained fairly close to 0.6 and, to a good approximation, saturation occurs at [He]/[Pd) =0.5.

Thermal-desorption-mass-spectrometry (TD-MS) experiments were performed on two di6'erent samples. The
first sample so studied was a high-purity palladium tritide
powder (100-[50-pm spherical particles) that had aged
for -2800 days with stoichiometry maintained nearly
constant at [T]/[M] ~0.65 (thus [He]/[Pd] —0.3), after
which most of the tritium was desorbed by roomtemperature evacuation (a more detailed description is
given elsewhere' ) ~ This sample was heated in steps to a
maximum temperature of 1373 K. During each temperature interval, the evolved gases are transferred to a known
volume using an all-metal Toepler pump, until the gas
evolution rate at the step temperature is essentially negligible. The collected gas is then analyzed by mass spectrometry. Figure 2 summarizes the helium release as a
function of temperature for the 2800-day-old material and
shows that essentially all of the helium in this material is
released by heat ramping to 1373 K. The absolute helium
content reported for this material is a lower limit due to
uncertainties in its storage history.

The second TD-MS sample was a well-characterized,
high-purity palladium powder ([0-20-pm spherical particles) that had aged for -200 days with an initial
stoichiometry of 0.63 (thus [He]/[Pd] 0.020), following
which the tritium was displaced by Bowing -0.3 MPa D2
through the palladium (heated to -350 K) and a flow
restrictor into a known volume. When the exchange was
nearly complete as judged by periodic mass spectrometric
analysis of the flow-through gas, -0.2 MPa D2 containing -2000 ppm CO was passed through the deuterided
material (at ambient temperature) in order to poison the
surface. This procedure reduces the off-gassing rate by
more than tenfold, and allows transfer of the deuterided
material with minimal loss of stoichiometry. A portion of
this material (-500 mg) was heated in a single step to 1273 K and held at that temperature until gas evolution
was essentially complete. (Most of the evolved gases in
this experiment were observed to be released below -700
K.) Subsequent mass spectrometric analysis revealed that
less than 1% of the He born in the palladium had been
released (this result is represented by the filled triangle in
Fig. 2). The released gas was primarily deuterium, consistent with an initial stoichiometry of [D]/[Pd]=0.60,
and a small amount of residual tritium [T]/[Pd] ~0.001.

The final experiment described here involved measurement of the total He content in a small amount of the annealed 200-day-old material from the previous experiment. The measurements were performed using a specialized gas mass-spectrometer system developed at Rockwell
International. Each sample for helium analysis was
prepared by taking a small quantity of the material (-1
to 3 mg) and wrapping it in a small aluminum-foil package. Sample masses were obtained by accurately weighing the aluminum foil before and after wrapping. The
aluminum foil was taken from a lot previously characterized at Rockwell to contain no measurable residual helium. Each of the helium analyses involved vaporizing the
entire sample and package in a resistance-heated graphite
crucible (maximum temperature about 3300 K) in one of
the mass spectrometer's high-temperature vacuum furnaces, and then measuring the He released relative to a
known quantity of added He "spike" (isotope dilution
method). The He spikes were obtained by expanding
and partitioning a known quantity of He gas through a
succession of accurately calibrated volumes. The mass
sensitivity for 3He relative to He (discrimination factor)
for the mass spectrometer was determined daily by analyses of various combinations of He and He spikes. The
discrimination factor had a typical value of 1.65. The results of four replicate analyses provide a mean 3He content of (1.082+ 0.005) X 1020 atoms/g. The mean reproducibility between the four replicate analyses is -0.5%.
Usual mass spectrometer system reproducibility is 0.4 to 0.5%, indicating that the He content of the material is
very homogeneous, at least for the sample mass range analyzed here. Absolute uncertainty (1~) in the individual
helium analysis results, determined from the cumulative
uncertainties in the sample mass, isotope ratio measurement, and spike size, is estimated to be —1%

Table I summarizes the helium release data for the
200-day-old PdT„material (first two rows), which conclusively demonstrate that release of the trapped helium
from this relatively young sample requires temperatures
well in excess of 1273 K. Very little of the helium is
released below this temperature. The mean [He]/[Pd] ratio obtained from the vaporization experiment (second
row) agrees to within experimental error with the calculated ratio. The latter quantity, which is based on the
known tritium-decay constant, '
assumes no release during ambient storage and accounts for the helium released
during the 1273 K TD-MS experiment (first row). Table
I also includes a comparison with the total helium released
from the 2800-day-old material (third row) in the 1373 K
TD-MS experiment.


III. DISCUSSION

The experiments described in this article provide convincing evidence that helium introduced into palladium
tritide via tritium decay is deeply trapped within the host
matrix. Under conditions of ambient-temperature
storage, nearly all the helium born in the host is retained
up to a saturation helium content of [He]/[Pd]=0. 5.
Thermal desorption experiments demonstrate that heating
a sample with a relatively high helium content of
[He]/[Pd]~0. 3 to 1373 K releases essentially all the
trapped helium. By contrast, heating a sample with a
much lower helium content of [He]/[Pd] ~0.02 to 1273 K
releases only about 1% of the trapped helium. The saturation helium content in PdT, ([He]/[Pd] ~0.5) is appreciably larger than the values of 0.1 to 0.3 obtained for other
material tritides, but is consistent with predictions
from loop-punching theory (unless the material strength
parameters of palladium tritide are appreciably different
from those of palladium). The thermal desorption experiments shown in Fig. 2 reveal that with increasing
[He]/[Pd] ratio, helium release shifts to a substantially
lower temperature range. (This effect has been observed
in a more systematic way for uranium tritide. '
) Release from material containing a small concentration of He requires appreciable bubble migration, i.e., high mobility of
vacancies and of metal atoms, and therefore, temperatures not too far belo~ the melting point of the host. By
contrast, material with a large He concentration (e.g.,
the 2800-day-old material with [He]/[Pd] =0.3) has
presumably developed a fairly extensive network of
helium-61led channels such as has been observed for ZrT„
by TEM. ' When a channel suddenly connects to an
external surface, some of the helium is released and the
external surface is extended. This mechanism, which is
consistent with microstructural evidence, can explain
low-temperature helium release at higher helium contents.
Regarding the possibility of cold fusion reactions during
ambient-temperature electrolysis of Pd in D20 solutions, ' '
the present experimental results demonstrate
that helium born within palladium hydride (H, D, or T)
almost certainly will not escape into the external gas
stream. Assuming the maximum helium production rate
(8x10's Hesec 'cm ) given in Ref. 16, more than 100
days of electrolysis would be required to attain
[He]/[Pd] 0.02. Therefore, release of a substantial fraction of this helium is inconsistent with the experimental
results described in the present article. Signi6cant release
could occur only if the fusion reactions were confined to
the near surface region (implying an even more improbable specific reaction rate). Even in this case, approximately 50% of the helium atoms would be implanted in
the metal (from energetic recoil of reaction products) and
subsequently trapped. Such trapped helium could easily
be detected (down to levels of —10'o atoms per gram of
Pd) by mass spectrometric analysis of the Pd-electrode
material.


References

G. J. Thomas, Radiat. Elf. 7$, 37 (1983).
2W. G. Wolfer, Philos. Mag. A 5$, 285 (1989);59, 87 (1989).
T. Schober, in Hydrogen in Disordered and Amorphous
Solids, edited by G. Bambakidls and R. C. Bowman, Jr. (Plenum, New York, 1986), p. 377 and references therein.
4R. Lasser, J. Less-Common Met. 131,263 (1987).
sT. Schober, Fusion Technol. 14, 637 (1988).
M. E. Malinowskl and P. R. Coronado, in Radiation sects
and Tritium Technology for Fusion Reactors, edited by J. S.
Watson and F. W. Wiffen, United States Energy Research
and Development Administration Conference Proceedings
No. 750989, Vol. IV (Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oakridge, 1976), p. 53.
~R. C. Bowman, Jr. and A. Attalla, Phys. Rev. B 16, 1828
(1977).
R. Lasser and T. Schober, in Hydrogen Storage Materials,
edited by R. G. Barnes, Materials Science Forum Series, Vol.
31 (Trans Tech Publications, Aedermannsdorf, Switzerland,
1988), p. 39.
9R. C. Bowman, Jr., Nature (London) 271, 531 (1978).
' R. C. Bowman, Jr., G. Bambakidis, G. C. Abell, A. Attalla,
and B. D. Craft, Phys. Rev. B 37, 9447 (1988).
''G. J. Thomas and J. M. Mintz, J. Nucl. Mater. 116, 336
(1983).
G. C. Abell and A. Attalla, Phys. Rev. Lett. 59, 995 (1987);
Fusion Technol. 14, 643 (1988).
' W. D. Wilson, C. L. Bisson, and M. I. Baskes, Phys. Rev. B
24, 5616 (1981).
' M. Fleischmann, S. Pons, and M. Hawkins, J. Electronal.
Chem. 261, 301 (1989);263, 187(E) (1989).
'SS. E. Jones et al. , Nature (London) 33$, 737 (1989).
' S. Pons and M. Hawkins, quoted by C. Wailing and J. Simons,
J. Phys. Chem. 93, 4693 (1989).
'7N. S. Lewis et al , Nature .(London) 340, 525 (1989).
' H. T. Weaver and W. Beezhold, Appl. Phys. Lett. 24, 522
(1974), and references therein.
'sR. C. Bowman, Jr., R. S. Carlson, and R. J. DeSando (unpublished); see also R. C. Bowman, Jr., R. S. Carlson, and R. J.
DeSando, Trans. Am. Nucl. Soc. 24, 496 (1976).
H. Farrar IV and B. M. Oliver, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A 4,
1740 (1986).
'C. R. Rudy and K. C. Jordan, EG8jcG Mound Applied Technologies, Miamisburg, Ohio, Report No. MLM-2458, 1977
(unpublished); B. M. Oliver, H. Farrar IV, and M. M.
Bretscher, Int. J. Appl. Radat. Isot. A 3$, 959 (1987).
2zH. Trinkaus, Radiat. Eff. 7$, 189 (1983).
23T. Schober and R. Lasser, J. Nucl. Mater. 120, 137 (1984).

