ANOMALIES IN THE SURFACE ANALYSIS OF DEUTERATED

PALLADIUM

Debra R. Rolison, William E. O’Grady, Robert J. Doyle, Jr.1, and Patricia P. Trzaskoma2
Surface Chemistry Branch, Code 6170; 1Code 6110; 2Code 6320

Naval Research Laboratory

Washington, DC 20375-5000


ABSTRACT

The surface and near-surface analytical characterization of thin palladium foils after
the electrolysis of H2O or D2O was performed with X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
(XPS), high resolution mass spectrometry, time-of-flight secondary ion mass
spectrometry (TOF-SIMS), and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). These surface
characterizations revealed a number of anomalous results, as summarized below.


INTRODUCTION

Our studies of the Pd-D2O system, precipitated by the announcement of the Fleischmann-Pons
effect [1], have centered on the exploration of the surface character of thin palladium foils before
and after electrolysis of pH-neutral solutions of D2O and H2O [2-4]. The importance of
understanding and controlling the nature of the electrode surface, so as to understand and control
electron-transfer reactions occurring at the electrode surface, underlies the field of
electrochemistry and has previously been emphasized as critical for the successful hydrogen
loading of Pd [5]. In light of the variability of observations made by the myriad researchers
exploring the Pd-D2O system, the imperative need to determine the physical, chemical, and
metallurgical nature of the palladium surface has recently been stressed [6,7].


EXPERIMENTAL

Electrochemistry and Chemicals

All electrolyses were performed, with one exception, in 0.1F Li2S04/D2O or H2O, as
appropriate. The one exception was a solution of 0.1F LiOD in D2O prepared by dissolving
lithium metal in D2O. H2O was triply distilled from quartz, 99.9% D2O [MSD Isotopes for the
preliminary experiments, Cambridge Isotope Laboratories for the majority of the experiments]
was used as received. Li ribbon [Alfa] and Li2S04 [Alfa, anhydrous] were used as received.

All electrolyses were performed with 99.9% Pd foil, 0.127-mm thick [historical supply of
precious metals, Naval Research Laboratory]. X-ray diffraction analysis of this foil showed that
it was preferentially oriented, primarily in the <200> direction [2]. The foils were acid etched in
1:1 HC/:HN03 to remove surface oxide, rinsed well, and then sonicated in the appropriate solvent
prior to use. The anode, with one exception described below, was 99.999% Pt wire [Alfa],
wound around a glass-rod cage so as to concentrically surround the Pd cathode.

The Pd foils were cathodically charged at 10 mA/cm2 using the galvanostatic mode of a EG&G
PAR Model 173 potentiostat/galvanostat; higher current densities were then usually applied. The
cells and experimental procedure have been described in greater detail elsewhere [2-4].


Mass Spectrometric Measurements

The mass/charge profile encompassing the Pd isotope range (m/z range 100-115) was
measured using the static SIMS mode of a TOF-SIMS built in-house at the Naval Research
Laboratory [8,9]. Positive-ion spectra were obtained by using primary ions of 14.0-keV cesium
ions from a pulsed alkali-ion gun containing a thermionic emitter. Each reported spectrum is the
average of two-to-three million spectra. Samples were argon-plasma cleaned, in situ, prior to
analysis.

High resolution (m/Δm > 50,000) analysis of m/z 3, 4, 5, and 6 of the gases emitted by 
electrochemically loaded PdDx was made using a ZAB-2F double-focusing mass spectrometer.

Slivers were cut from the Pd foil immediately after electrolysis and placed in glass capillaries;
the capillaries were introduced into an electron ionization source via a standard solids probe.

This experiment was performed for one sample only. Background pressure was 10-8 torr.

The mass/charge region encompassing the Pd isotope window (m/z 102-110) was obtained by
wrapping the foils (before and after electrolysis) around a solids probe and fast-atom bombarding
with 8 keV Xe; resolution was m/Δm = 3300. 6-10 spectra were signal averaged to produce the
obtained spectrum. To gauge the presence of interfering polyatomic species at m/z 106, the ions
comprising m/z 106 were mass selected and collided with helium neutrals to induce dissociation
of polyatomics.

To obtain the ratio of m/z 7 to m/z 6, lithium salts were dissolved to ≈0.1F with H2O and
aliquots of the solution were evaporated on the solids probe.


Bulk and Surface Elemental Analysis

Atomic emission spectrographic analysis of the stock Pd foil showed significant
concentrations of the following metals [3]:

Element

Concentration/ppm
Ni
Pt
Ag
Rh
Cu
Si
Elemental analysis of the Pd surface before and after electrolysis was performed with a
Surface Sciences Instruments Model SSX-100-03 X-ray photoelectron spectrometer with a
small-spot capability and equipped with an Al anode. Foils analyzed immediately after
electrolysis outgassed so severely (> 10-7 torr background pressure) that ≈12 h were required to 
reduce the pressure to the typical analysis pressure of < 5 x 10-9 torr [3]. Binding energies are
referenced to the adventitious C1s line at 284.6 eV. Overlapping lines were deconvoluted with a
graphics package using a χ2-minimization calculation.


Scanning Electron Microscopy

Scanning electron microscopy was performed with a Hitachi Model S-800 Field Emission
Microscope. Photomicrographs were taken in the normal mode (using the secondary electrons
emitted from the sample) and, to accentuate surface topography, in the differential mode.


RESULTS and DISCUSSION

X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopic Analyses

Survey scans of the etched Pd, an example of which is shown in Figure 1a, consist of the
characteristic Pd lines with a trace amount of spectrometer-derived carbon. The small peak at
≈50 eV is due to Pd5p3/2; the other platinum-group metals also have weak, higher valence lines
in this area making any post-electrolysis assignment of Li1s, by XPS, ambiguous.

After electrolysis of D2O for an accumulation of 1.9 x 105 Coulombs of charge, other
elemental lines are now evident in the survey scan (Figure 1b), e.g., O1s (the small contribution
seen for Pd3p1/2 at 560 eV shows that the line at 530 eV is predominantly Ols and not Pd3p3/2),
Na1s (and a Na Auger line), Pt4f, a Mg Auger line, Zn2p, Si2p, S2p, and Cu2p. While elemental
components derived from the glass cell (Si, Mg, Na) are present, as is Pt (electrodeposited at the
surface as Pt metal from Pt ions generated by the oxidative dissolution of the anode), the surface
retains a Pd signature.

Although Rh and Ag are present in our Pd stock at a concentration below the limit of detection
by XPS, after electrolysis of either D2O or H2O, Rh and Ag can be detected at the surface of the
Pd by signal averaging tens of high resolution scans. The concentrations of Rh and Ag maximize
at 3 and 1 atom%, respectively, relative to the Pd signal [3].

Rh and Ag do not electrodeposit, but rather they concentrate towards the interface as a
function of the long duration and high accumulated charge of the electrolysis. This was
determined in two ways: (i) by the absence of Ag signals for the one sample electrolyzed in
LiOD – this sample had no Pd signal and strong Pt signals due to electrodeposited Pt; and (ii) by
using the small-spot capability of the spectrometer, the analysis was centered on a slight scratch
made in the surface before placing the sample in the spectrometer – this procedure emphasizes
bulk material brought to the surface; the Pt4d5/2 line was found to strongly decrease while the
area due to the Rh3d3/2 line remained unchanged. Both of these results are consistent with a Pt
signal dominated by Pt derived from electrodeposition and Ag and Rh signals derived from
surface enrichment of Rh and Ag residing in the bulk Pd.

The concentration of the Rh increased as a function of total accumulated charge, but plateaued
at ≈3 atom% [3]. The magnitude of the surface enrichment can be gauged by estimating the 
depth of the enriched layer assuming a uniform 3 atom% concentration. This layer would be
≈0.1-μm thick – which is a serious degree of migration / segregation in a foil on the order of
102-μm thick. As both Ag and Rh appear at the surface of Pd charged in either D2O or H2O, a
mechanism based on surface segregation and forced diffusion as the Pd lattice is filled with H· or
D· atoms seems more probable than one relying on known neutron activation reactions of Pd
isotopes, some of which yield stable Ag and Rh isotopes [10]. Intriguing though this latter
prospect may be, experiments with 99.999% Pd would be required before a physical transport
mechanism could start to be discounted.

Figure 1. X-ray photoelectron survey scans of Pd foil: (a) after etching in 1:1 HCl:HN03; and (b) after
electrolysis in 0.1F Li2S04/D2O for a total accumulated cathodic charge of 1.9 x 105 C.


Mass Spectrometric Analyses

Pd

TOF-SIMS measurements of the Pd blank (the Pd starting material prior to electrolysis) and Pd
electrolyzed in H2O yielded mass-to-charge vs. amu intensities which mirrored the expected
sequence for the stable Pd isotopes (neglecting the 1.02% abundant 102Pd). The ideal abundances
are [11]:

Isotope

Natural Abundance/%
104Pd
105Pd
106Pd
108Pd
110Pd
Two samples electrolyzed in D2O exhibited greater than 20% enrichments in m/z 106 intensity
and diminutions in m/z 105 intensity [2]. This result is provocative because of the implication
that 105Pd obtained a neutron to generate 106Pd. The more startling 106Pd enrichment (≈100% over 
ideal) was observed for the only sample electrolyzed in LiOD; an enrichment of ≈45% was 
observed for one of the samples electrolyzed in Li2S04. It was shown using the Pd blanks and the
sample used to electrolyze H2O that the conditions of the TOF-SIMS measurements, including
in-situ plasma cleaning of the samples, were not responsible for the enrichment/ diminution
phenomena [2].

Subsequent fast-atom bombardment, high-resolution mass spectrometric measurements on the
LiOD sample replicated the TOF-SIMS results, however, mass selecting the ions at m/z 106 and
using collisional-induced dissociation showed a loss of oxygen atoms indicating that the intensity
at m/z 106 was compromised by the presence of polyatomic ions. It was shown that the species
was 90Zr16O, a species with a nearly coincident mass to 106Pd, 105.8992 and 105.9032,
respectively. The zirconium isotopic distribution allows ZrO species to unfortunately overlap
most of the Pd isotopic distribution (see Figure 2b), making high resolution measurements of this
region (or the Pd dimer mass/charge region) necessary [12]. After 30 min of bombardment, the
isotopic distribution reflected the expected abundances for Pd. The zirconium was present at the
surface as Zr02 (confirmed by XPS), at trace levels, and it derived from the electrochemical (or
post-electrolytic) conditions and not from a plasma-generated contaminant.

The Li2S04-derived, 106Pd-enriched sample was Zr-free according to TOF-SIMS data, see
Figure 2a; unfortunately, it no longer existed in a form compatible with surface-sensitive high
resolution mass spectrometry (having earlier been dissolved in 1:1 HC/:HN03 to pursue other
analytical chimera). Other Pd foils used to electrolyze D2O have shown, by high resolution mass
spectrometry, a mass/charge distribution in this region which matches the expected Pd isotopic
distribution, including a sample only mildly etched, so that the cold-worked overlayer remained.

The source of the anomaly in the Pd isotopic distribution for the one Li2S04-derived sample
remains unexplained. We have recently recognized that this sample was coincidentally
contaminated with Cd due to an impurity in the Pt-gauze used as an anode while awaiting receipt
of the 99.999% Pt wire. (106Cd is a stable isotope but has an abundance of 1.25% [11]; signals for
the significantly more abundant 112Cd (24.13%) and 114Cd (28.72%) are absent in the TOF-SIMS
spectrum.) Cd has a high overvoltage for the evolution of hydrogen [13], i.e., the back reaction
of D· atoms recombining to form D2 gas is inhibited. Cd may have provided a serendipitous, low-
level surface poison and it is conceivable that higher D:Pd levels were achieved in this one
experiment than in subsequent experiments. Experiments to test this possibility are in progress.

Figure 2. TOF-SIMS spectra obtained for Pd foil after electrolysis in (a) 0.1F Li2SO4/D2O for a total
accumulated cathodic charge of > 8 x 103 C; and (b) 0.1F LiOD/D2O for a total accumulated cathodic charge
of 1.4 x 106 C. The m/z range is chosen to encompass the Zr and Pd isotopic distributions.


Li

As has been pointed out by others, the natural abundance of Li isotopes (7Li, 92.5% abundant
and 6Li, 7.5% abundant) is not necessarily found in commercial lithium salts due to the
extraction of the neutron-scavenging 6Li isotope. Consequently, any determination of the 7Li-to-
6Li ratio for Pd after electrolysis of Li+/D2O electrolytes needs to be balanced against the ratio of
the starting lithium electrolyte salt. Sampling, via fast-atom bombardment mass spectrometric
analysis, of some lithium salts stocked at our laboratory shows how variable the 7Li-to-6Li ratio
can be, as summarized below:

Li salt
7Li-to-6Li ratio
Source
Natural Abundance
Big Bang
LiOD
31 ± 1
Li metal, Alfa
LiB4O7
Johnson Matthey
LiI
Alfa
LiI
Aldrich
LiBO2
Johnson Matthey


H/D/T

The copious explosion of gas that bursts from the surface of the Pd cathode when the
electrochemical circuit is broken is followed by long-term outgassing, as can be observed by the
gas bubbles that form when the Pd cathode is stored under water after electrolysis. Likewise,
even slivers of material cut from the Pd after electrolysis provide ample gas to analyze by mass
spectrometry. High resolution analysis of the gases emitted from one Pd foil after charging in
Li2SO4/D2O showed that the m/z 3, 4, 5, and 6 peaks were composed of the dimers and readily
formed trimers of hydrogen and deuterium with no detectable quantities of tritium-based species.


Scanning Electron Microscopic Analyses

SEM has been used to explore Pd foil before and after use as cathodes to electrolyze H2O and
D2O [4]. After sufficient etching to leave visible crystal grains, the majority of the grains are
roughened, but ≈20-30% of the grains remain smooth and unfeatured even at high magnification
(> 15,000 x). The surface morphology changes after electrolysis, with the roughened grains
restructuring to yield greater intragranular homogeneity and features of higher surface area,
however, smooth and unfeatured grains persist after electrolysis of both D2O and H2O
electrolytes.

Three characteristic grains have been observed for PdDx from highly etched stock, the smooth,
unstructured grains, and two structured morphologies. On the micrometer scale, as seen in Figure
3, one structure consists of rugged, parallel, thin-edged ridges (Figure 3a), and the other is an
intertwined structure (Figure 3b, lower half), which at higher magnification, might be the
beginning of crystal faceting [4].

The degree of the initial etch governs the development of the surface structures that form with
electrolysis. SEM survey scans of Pd cathodes after electrolysis must be placed in the context of
the initial microscopic morphology of a portion of the same piece of Pd. We attempted to control
this by etching a large piece of Pd foil and then using portions of it for electrolytic preparation of
PdHx and PdDx using comparable electrolytic histories.

Three PdDx samples have been prepared, yielding comparable characteristic morphologies,
and one PdHx sample has been prepared, electrolytically analogous to one of the three PdDx
samples. The PdHx sample also produced restructured grains with greater intragranular
homogeneity and higher surface area than the initial etch morphology, however the resulting
restructured morphologies differed between H- and D-exposed Pd. The surface of the structured
grains for PdHx appeared more polished and had features that were less deep and developed than
those on the comparably treated PdDx. An additional series will be run to confirm this difference
in morphology between electrolytically prepared PdHx and PdDx.

Cracks and fissures do not appear to be part of the morphology after electrolysis for either
system; this may be due to the well-defined grain boundaries, resulting from the etch, which
provide non-catastrophic paths for gas release when the electrical circuit is broken.

Photomicrographs taken in the differential mode indicated that intergranular elevational
differences resulted between the smooth, unstructured grains and the roughened and structured
grains, as seen in Figure 4a. Stereopairs made in 2-3 locations for PdHx, all three PdDx samples,
and reserved samples of the initially etched Pd confirmed the intergranular elevational
differences and showed that the structured grains are uplifted relative to the smooth, unstructured
grains, but only for the PdDx samples. This topography is somewhat restricted to the nearsurface
region in that all intergranular differences in elevation disappeared after a piece of the sample
shown in Figure 3 was subjected to ~10 min of fast -atom bombardment, as seen in Figure 4b. In
addition, the high surface area features are now absent. Quantifying the depth of the profile is not
routinely done in this experiment, so the restructured layer can only be estimated as greater than
nanometer, but less than micrometer in depth. We assign the process for uplifting to the premier,
rapid episode of outgassing because (i) deformation, due solely to lattice expansion upon
formation of the hydride or deuteride would have produced greater deformation for the PdHx
sample since palladium hydride expands more than does palladium deuteride [5]; (ii) one of the
three PdDx samples was subjected to multiple charge/outgassing cycles and showed a
qualitatively similar degree of uplifting as singly outgassed samples; (iii) the smooth grains
appear structurally indifferent to hydrogen or deuterium loading; and (iv) the outrush of gas is
visibly more explosive for the PdDx system than it is for the PdHx system.

Figure 3. Photomicrographs (normal mode) of the two characteristic restructured grains observed on highly
etched Pd foil after electrolysis of 0.1F Li2SO4/D2O (total accumulated cathodic charge = 1.9 x 105 C): (a)
morphology described as rugged, parallel thin-edged ridges (tilt = 30°, 5000x); and (b) morphology described
as an intertwined structure, lower half (tilt = 22°, 8000x).

Figure 4. Photomicrographs (differential mode) showing (a) the presence of intergranular elevational
differences for the sample of Figure 3 (tilt = 30°, 170x); and (b) the absence of intergranular elevational
differences after fast-atom bombardment of the surface (tilt = 30°, 200 x).


CONCLUSIONS

Our surface analytical characterizations of Pd-H2O and Pd-D2O systems have produced a
number of unusual results involving: (i) a relative enrichment at m/z 106 that cannot be
attributed to heretofore-identified plausible chemical interferents:
(ii) segregation of metallic impurities (present in the bulk Pd at 102-ppm levels) to the surface of
the more resistive, but still conductive PdDx or PdHx at atom-% levels; (iii) differently
structured morphologies for PdDx and PdHx;
(iv) grains which remain smooth and unstructured even after electrolysis of D2O or H2O
solutions to 10° C of accumulated charge; and (v) intergranular uplift for the structured grains
relative to the unstructured grains, but only for PdDx samples.

Obviously the surface and near-surface characterization of electrolytically prepared PdDx
systems requires great care and attention, but with the reward of unusual results.


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We are grateful to Dr. Steven M. Hues (NRL) for the TOF-SIMS measurements, to Mr. John
Norris (National Institute of Standards and Technology) for the atomic emission analyses, and to
Dr. Robert Jones (NRL) for the X-ray diffraction measurements. Funding for this research was
provided through the Office of Naval Research.


REFERENCES

[1] M. Fleischmann, S. Pons, and M. Hawkins, J. Electroanal. Chem., 261 (1989) 301; errata,
263 (1989) 187.
[2] D. R. Rolison and W. E. O'Grady, Proc. NSF-EPRI Workshop on Anomalous Effects in
Deuterated Metals, 16-18 October 1989, Washington, DC, (1990).
[3] D. R. Rolison and W. E. O'Grady, Anal. Own., submitted.
[4] D. R. Rolison and P. P. Trzaskoma, J. Electroanal. Chem., submitted.
[5] F. A. Lewis, The Palladium Hydrogen System, Academic Press: London, 1967.
[6] Panel Discussions, 1st Annu. Conf. on Cold Fusion, 28. 31 March 1990, Salt Lake City, UT.
[7] L. E. Murr, Scripta Metallurg. Mater., 24 (1990) 783.
[8] S. M. Hues, R. J. Colton, R. L. Mowery, K. J. McGrath, and J. R. Wyatt, Appl. Swf. Sci., 35
(198889) 507.
[9] S. M. Hues, R. J. Colton, J. R. Wyatt, and J. A. Schultz, Rev. Sci. Instmm., 60 (1989) 1239.
[10] D. Taylor, Neutron Irradiation and Activation Analysis, Van Nostrand: Princeton, NJ, 1964.
[11] J. Emsley, The Elements, Clarendon Press: Oxford, 1989.
[12] We would like to emphasize, yet again, that we have always referred to this observation as a
mass/charge anomaly and not as an isotopic anomaly. The result, while valid for this one sample,
and certainly intriguing, can only legitimately be described as a mass/charge anomaly when
using this experimental approach and the resolution of this experiment.
[13] R. J. Latham and N. A. Hampson, Encyclopedia of Electrochemistry of the Elements, Vol.
1, A. J. Bard, Ed., Marcel Dekker: New York, 1973, 155.
