INTRODUCTION

Calorimetric techniques have widely been used to
study thermochemical properties of both static and
reacting systems with great success. A great deal of
attention has been drawn to this experimental method
recently as a result of the announcement by
Fleischmann and Pons last year [1] that they had
observed the generation of large amounts of excess
heat when deuterium is electrochemically inserted
into palladium. This paper describes the design and
performance characteristics of a new type of
isoperibolic calorimeter that has been employed for
heat flux measurements during the electrolysis of
both light and heavy water upon palladium cathodes.

The word "isoperibol" denotes uniform
surroundings. So, isoperibolic calorimetry refers to
methods in which thermal energy is transferred from
a heat source to a surro unding heat sink that is
maintained at a constant temperature. It is generally
operated in a steady state power balance mode. When
applied to electrolysis systems, heat is typically
generated within the electrochemical cell and
transferred through a intermediate thermallyconducting
layer to a surrounding water bath held at
constant temperature. Under steady state conditions,
a temperature distribution is established in which the
temperature difference across the thermally
conducting layer transports heat at a rate that just
balances the power generated within the
electrochemical cell. Thus, in principle,
measurement of the temperature difference between
the cell and the surrounding bath provides
information about the thermal power generated in the
electrochemical cell, Ptherm- This can be simply
expressed as
Ptherm = K (T1 - T2) (1)
where K is the calorimeter calibration constant, and
T1 and T2 are the temperatures of the cell and bath.

As will be shown below, if the electrical power
applied to the cell causes a chemical or
electrochemical reaction to occur that involves a
change in the enthalpy of the system, the thermal
power generated Ptherm is not equal to the applied
electrical power Papp! . This is described as a
thermodynamically "open system", and is the case if
the gaseous products of the electrolysis reaction are
allowed to escape. As a result, the temperature
difference between the cell and the surrounding bath
is less than it would be if the applied electrical power
produced only Joule heating.

On the other hand, if a thermodynamically "closed
cell" design employing an in-cell recombination
catalyst is used, so that no enthalpy is transported out
of the system, Ptherm and Papp! will be equal if
there is no other heat generation or absorption
process present. This is thus a conceptually simpler
situation, and any measured difference between the
input and outpu t powers must have some other
origin. One possibility is that it might be due to some
additional power generation process taking place
inside the electrochemical cell, as proposed by
Fleischmann and Pons [ 1].


CALORIMETER DESIGN 

A new type of isoperibolic calorimeter has been 
designed in which various issues such as the 
influence of the physical locations at which heat is 
produced and at which the temperatures are measured 
during both calibration and operation, and the 
magnitude of the stirring of the electrolyte fluid are 
not relevant. 

The new design consists of two concentric heavy 
aluminum cylinders that are separated by a well 
defined thermally conducting layer. 
The 
electrochemical cell fits snugly inside the axial hole 
of the inner cylinder. Under steady state conditions, 
essentially all the heat generated within the 
electrochemical cell passes to the external 
environment radially through the surrounding 
cylinders. 

Instead of relying upon measurement of the 
temperature within the electrochemical cell itself, as 
well as of the assumed homogeneous environment, 
this design involves the measurement of the 
temperatures of the two aluminum cylinders. 
Because of their dimensions and excellent thermal 
conductivity, the aluminum cylinders provide 
temperature uniformity. Thus possible sources of 
error related to issues such as the amount of stirring 
and the locations of the heat sources and temperature 
measurement within the electrochemical cell are 
avoided. 

The design of this new isoperibolic calorimeter is 
shown schematically in Figure 1. The inner (T1) 
aluminum cylinder has an outer diameter of 2 inches 
and an inner diameter of 1.17 inches. It is 4 inches 
long, and weighs about 365 g. The outer (T2) 
aluminum cylinder is 7 inches long and weighs 958 
g. Its inner diameter is 2.25 inches, and its outer
diameter, 3.0 inches. Thus the gap across which the
heat conduction takes place, and the temperature
difference is measured, is 0.125 inches. The
container for the electrochemical cell that fits snugly
inside the (T1) cylinder is a quartz tube 1.14 inches
(29 mm) in outside iliameter and 4 inches long.

The inner (T1) cylinder housing the electrochemical 
cell is mounted on Teflon supports and placed 
concentrically inside the outer (T2) cylinder in such a 
way that 1.5 inches of vertical space is left above and 
below the inner cylinder. This vertical space above 
and below as well as the 0.125 inch wide radial gap 
between the two cylinders is packed with Al203 
powder. This thick layer of Ah03 powder insulation 
above and below the cell and inner cylinder forces 
the heat to be transfered in the radial direction across 
the gap between the two cylinders. The effective
thermal conductivity of this Al203 powder, which 
has a particle size range of 50-200 mm, was 
experimentally determined to be about 1.6xI0-3 
W/cm.°C. 

Figure 1. Schematic design of the concentric cylinder 
isoperibolic calorimeter with the external thin sheet 
Joule heater wrapped around the electrochemical cell 
and inserted inside the inner aluminum cylinder.
 
Three small thermocouple holes 1/16 inches in 
diameter were drilled vertically down to half-height 
of each aluminum cylinder. The holes are located at 
midpoints of the wall thickness of the cylinders and 
are spaced 120° circumferentially from each other. 
Copper-constantan (Type T) thermocouples were 
firmly fixed into these holes so as to make good 
physical contact with the aluminum. A few drops of 
silicone oil were put at the bottom of these holes to 
enhance the 
thermal contact between the 
thermocouples and the aluminum cylinders. The 
thermocouples are used in a differential mode such 
that each calorimeter contains four pairs of 
thermocouples. In each case, the outer members are 
copper, so as to avoid any thermoelectric effects 
when they are joined to the measuring circuitry. Two 
pairs are connected between the inner (T1) and outer 
(T2) aluminum cylinders to sense the temperature 
difference between the cylinders. The other two pairs 
of thermocouples are connected between each 
aluminum cylinder and the surrounding constant 
temperature water bath. Thus all possible adverse 
thermoelectric contributions from dissimilar contacts 
are eliminated. The linear response of these T-type 
thermocouples is 39 mV/°C. A 6 1/2 digit Keithley 
Model 193A microvoltmeter is used for reading the 
thermocouple output and it thus provides a resolution 
of about 0.025 °c. 

Eight such calorimeters have been built and tested. 
Their 1/e time constants were determined from their 
transient response to step changes in the level of the 
input power, and were found to range between 13 
and 15 minutes. 


ELECTROCHEMICAL CELL DESIGN 

The electrochemical cells used in this work are 
thermodynamically "closed" cells, i.e., they contain 
an internal recombination catalyst made of finely 
divided Pt supported on Teflon with a nickel backing 
to recombine the D2 and 02 formed by the 
electrolysis and return it by gravity back into the 
electrolyte. In contrast, the gaseous products of 
electrolysis are vented off to the outside in "open" 
cells. 

The cells were connected externally to silicone oil 
bubblers by plastic tubing. This served two 
purposes. One is to prevent atmospheric moisture to 
diffuse back into the electrolyte of the electrochemical 
cells, which contain about 20 ml of 0.1 M LiOD in 
D2O. This is an important consideration since D2O 
attracts light water strongly, and hydrogen is 
selectively absorbed into the Pd cathode.The other 
reason for the bubbler is to allow the escape of gas in 
the amount of uncombined oxygen. Observation of 
the time behavior of the bubble evolution provided 
information about this process, and showed that it 
ceased as the Pd cathode became saturated with 
deuterium. 

The Pd cathodes were prepared by repeated arc 
melting in a gettered argon atmosphere, followed by 
mechanical deformation to produce a "fat dime" 
shape. Earlier, thin Pt and Au wires were used to 
make electrical connections to the Pd cathodes. 

However, due to surface contamination problems, 
the cathode current collector was changed to fine Pd 
wire, which was shielded by a thin Teflon tube to 
prevent appreciable electrolysis taking place on it, 
rather than on the Pd cathode. 

Three different cell designs have been studied. In the 
first design, a static immersion heater shielded in J -
shaped quartz tubing was used to provide the Joule 
heating for calibration. The cell was sealed with a 
rubber stopper, which housed the feed-throughs for 
cathode and anode lead connections, the immersion 
Joule heater, and the gas vent to the silicone bubbler. 
The anode was about 200 cm of 0.010 inch thick Pt 
wire spirally wound inside the cell. The anode to 
cathode surf ace area ratios were between 10 and 15 
to assure that most of the applied voltage drop was at 
the Pd cathode. 

Although this general design provided reproducible 
calibration and stable electrochemical performance, 
the problems associated with the cramped space 
inside the cell as well as in the rubber stopper and the 
occasional and unpredictable breakage of the quartz 
shielding around the Joule heater led to a modified 
design. 

Energy dispersive spectroscopy studies of the 
surf ace of the Pd cathodes indicated the presence of 
substantial amounts of Pt coverage, which can block 
deuterium insertion. Therefore, the fine wire Pt 
anodes were replaced by large surface area thin Pd 
ribbon anodes, produced by rolling 1/8 inch O.D. Pd 
wire. This modification has the advantage of 
continuously depositing fresh Pd upon the cathode 
surface, which could cover up any potentially 
blocking metallic or other impurities that might be 
deposited during the electrolysis process. 

The second design used a modified three-electrode 
configuration, in which heat generated by electrolysis 
upon an auxiliary Pt wire cathode centered within the 
cell was utilized for calibration purposes. Passing 
current between this Pt cathode (instead of the Pd 
cathode) and the Pd anode caused only the generation 
of Joule heat, so that measurement of the electrical 
input to this configuration provided a simple 
calibration method, with gas generation, bubble -
driven stirring, and recombination similar to that 
which takes place during electrolysis with the Pd 
cathode. Of course, one had to be sure to open the Pt 
cathode circuit during operation of the Pd cathode to 
insure that there was no electrical cross talk between 
the two cathodes. Again, rubber stoppers were used 
to support the electrical feed-throughs and the gas 
vent to the bubbler. 

The third design used a simple Pd cathode and Pd 
ribbon anode arrangement inside the cell. Joule 
heater power for calibration was provided by a thin 
film sheet heater which was snugly fitted between the 
outside of the quartz cell and the inside of the inner 
aluminum cylinder of the calorimeter. Rubber 
stoppers were abandoned because of concern about 
their possible contamination of the electrolyte, and 
were replaced by cell caps machined out of Delrin. 


EXPERIMENT AL PROCEDURES 

Calorimeter Calibration Principles: 
The basic equation for an isoperibolic calorimeter 
was given earlier as equation (1), which relates the 
thermal power output to the measured temperature 
change through the calibration constant, K.ln the 
current design, the value of K is determined by the 
construction of the concentric cylinder calorimeter, 
and is independent of the particular experiment being 
performed within it. 

The most common way of supplying the power for 
calibration is by the use of an internal Joule heater. 
Several levels of electrical power are applied, and the 
corresponding increases in the steady state 
temperature evaluated. A plot of (T1-T2) versus 
applied electrical power gives a linear relation, whose 
slope is the reciprocal of the calibration constant K. 

However, it is often desirable to perform a 
calibration of the calorimeter while electrolysis is also 
taking place. In that_ case, the total applied t erm l 
power introduced ts the sum of that . which 1s
provided by the Joule heater and that contnbuted as a 
result of the electrolytic process. In addition, we 
must consider the possibility that there may also be 
another phenomenon present that 
introduces 
additional thermal power, Pint• 

In the absence of any other energy generating or 
consuming effects, so that Pint is zero, electrolysis 
conducted in a "closed" cell in which the gaseous 
products of the electrolysis are internally 
recombined, produces exactly the same results as a 
simple Joule heater [2-4]. 

This is not true in the case of an "open" cell, 
however, as enthalpy is carried out of the system by 
the escape of evolved gases. Therefore the 
contribution to (T 1 -T2) due to the electrical power 
applied to the electrolysis process will_be lowe  than 
if the same amount of power were applied to a simple 
Joule heater, and the apparent value of K would be 
greater than the proper one. 

There is an additional effect that must be considered 
in order to obtain a proper calibration of a calorimeter 
by adding Joule heat in the presence of electrolysis. 
This is because changes in applied Joule heater 
power cause changes in the temperature of the 
electrolyte. This causes changes in electrolyte 
resistance, and can thus influence the amount of 
thermal power introduced in connection with the 
electrolysis reaction. 

As an example, if additional heater power t:\Phtr is 
applied, the electrolyte temperature will increase. 
Because of this increased temperature, the overall cell 
resistance decreases. 

If the electrolysis is being conducted under constant 
voltage conditions, the electrolysis current will 
increase. This increases the electrolysis thermal 
power input by an amount t:\Pel• On the other hand, if 
the electrolysis is conducted under constant current 
conditions, the voltage and the thermal power 
introduced by the applied electrolysis power will 
both decrease. 

Thus we see that the total change in thermal power 
introduced into the calorimeter is the sum of two 
factors, that simply due to the added calibration 
heater power t:\Phtr, and that due to a change in the 
electrolysis power t:\P el due to the concommitant 
decreased electrolyte resistance. 

Therefore, we can not merely compare the observed 
value of (T1-T2) to the sum of the electrical power 
applied to the heater and that applied to the 
electrolysis reaction. We must separate these two 
effects. The total power, Ptot , put into the cell 
during calibration while electrolysis is also taking 
place is 
Ptot = Phtr + Pel + Pint 
Additional Joule heater power increases the 
temperature difference (T1-T2) by t:\Thtr such that the 
total temperature rise, 6.Ttot , is given by 
L\Ttot = t:\Thtr + L\T el + t:\Tint 
where t:\ Tel is the change in (T 1 -T 2) due to the 
change in the electrolysis power, and .1 Tint is the 
change in (T1-T2) due to any related change in the 
additional internal heat generation process, if one is 
present. 


We can also write 
.1.Ttot = .1.Phtr 1K + .1.Pel IKel + .1.Pint /Kint (4) 
if the values of K, Ke! and Kint are not the same. In 
that case, we note that ( 4) is not the same as 
.1.Ttot = (.1.Phtr + .1.Pel + .1.Pint ) / K 
which would be the case if all the K values were the 
same. 
The apparent value of K that would result from this 
experiment is given by 
Kapparent = (.1.Phtr+.1.Pe1+.1.Pint)/(.1.Thtr+.1.Te1 +.1.Tint)
which can be quite different from the real value 
characteristic of the calorimeter, K. 

This problem can be solved by assuming that .1.Pe1 
and .1.Pint are coupled, and can be represented by a 
single value of Kel, which can be found from the 
values of (T1 -T2) and Pel in the absence of any 
heater power. If the magnitude of Kel varies with 
electrolysis power level, it can be determined over 
any desired power range by performing an additional 
experiment, in which the value of this composite Ke1 
is determined by observing the change in temperature 
difference (.1. Tel + .1. Tint) that results from a change 
in the electrical power input .1.Pel applied to the 
electrolysis process. For that case, 
Thus if we have the value of Ke1 we can find the 
proper value of K for the calorimeter from 
K = .1.Phtrl (.1.Ttot - (.1.Tel + .1.TmJ) 
= .1.Phtr / (.1. T tot - (.1.P el/ Ke1)) 

An alternative strategy is to operate the cell in a 
different mode, maintaining the electrolysis power 
constant, with the computer, rather than keeping the 
electrolysis voltage constant. If we did this, the 
electrolysis power would not go up when the heater 
power is introduced, and the observed temperature 
rise would be due to the effect of the heater power 
alone. This would allow direct evaluation of K 
without the need for a separate experiment to evaluate 
Ke1 and to separate out the two factors. 

However, if the electrolyte temperature increases, 
and thus its resistance decreases, as the result of the 
addition of heater power, the relationship between 
electrolysis voltage and current will change, even 
under constant electrolysis power. 


Calibration Procedure 

Experiments were performed to determine the values 
of K for the calorimeters using three different 
methods of introducing power, an immersion Joule 
heater within the electrochemical cell, internal 
electrolysis, and a Joule heater placed between the 
external wall of the electrochemical cell and the inside 
surface of the inner cylinder of the calorimeter. Each 
of these methods can be readily incorporated into the 
electrochemical cell design, as discussed earlier. The 
calibration procedure simply involved the 
introduction of several levels of Joule heating power, 
in both increasing and decreasing steps, and the 
measurement of the temperature difference between 
the two aluminum cylinders in each case. 
Calibrations were carried out both with and without 
concurrent "closed cell" electrolysis, and with the 
electrolysis conducted in either the constant power 
mode or the constant voltage mode. In the latter case, 
the corrections discussed above were applied. 


Measurement and Data Acquisition System 

The power for both the electrolysis and the Joule 
heater were supplied by Lambda LLS series power 
supplies. In the case of constant electrolysis power, 
the power supplies for the electrolysis process were 
computer controlled. A Macintosh Ilx computer was 
used for this purpose as well as for calorimeter data 
acquisition, using a Keithley 193A microvoltmeter 
and a Keithley 706 scanner. For each calorimeter, a 
total of ten experimental parameters were monitored. 
They included four differential and two absolute 
thermocouple values, as well as two voltage and two 
current (read as voltage across precision resistors) 
values. They were measured sequentially, and each 
point was averaged over ten readings and stored 
every 5 to 15 seconds. The hardware allowed five 
calorimeters to be monitored and controlled 
simultaneously. Both the cell operation and the data 
acquisition were controlled using the Lab View 
software from National Instruments Co. 


CALIBRATION RESULTS 

As mentioned earlier, the temperature distribution 
within the calorimeter is measured by the use of six 
copper-constantan (Type T) thermocouples located 
at different positions in the calorimeter. They were 
configured in a differential mode such that only the 
copper ends of each pair were connected to the 
microvoltmeter, eliminating spurious thermoelectric 
effects. Figure 2 shows the exceptional agreement 
between three temperature difference measurements, 
made at the six points in the calorimeter by the four
pairs of differential thermocouples, and clearly 
demonstrates the uniformity of the temperature 
distribution within the calorimeter. This is an 
important advantage. It eliminates any ambiguity 
about the locations of the sources of heat and the 
temperature probes within the electrochemical cell. 
Hence the extent of stirring to distribute the heat 
within the electrochemical cell becomes irrelevant.  
 
Figure 2. The variation of temperature with time during a calibration 
experiment at three levels of power input using an immersion Joule heater. 
All three differential temperatures measured at different locations lie exactly 
on top of each other indicating a uniform temperature distribution within the 
inner aluminum cylinder in the calorimeter. 

These data also illustrate the typical time - dependent 
variation of the temperature during a calibration 
carried out by the use of an immersion Joule heater. 

A typical time variation of the two electrical power 
inputs during a calibration experiment is shown in 
Figure 3(a). The Joule heat for calibration was 
supplied by a thin sheet heater external to the 
electrochemical cell, and the electrolysis was 
operated in the constant power mode in this case. 
Note that all are very flat and steady with time. High 
total power levels, sometimes in excess of 20 watts, 
as was the case here, have been commonly used in 
both our calibration and electrochemical insertion 
experiments. 

The time variation of the calibration constant 
extracted from these data using equation (8) is shown 
in Figure 3(b). The spikes on the graph are due to the 
transient behavior of the calorimeter when the input 
power level is varied abruptly. The steady state 
behavior, however, clearly shows that the calibration 
constant values are very consistent, lying in a band 
less than 0.5 % wide, and independent of the input 
power level as well as time. 

The effect of different modes of Joule heating during 
calibration experiments was also studied. It was 
found that the value of the calibration constant was 
independent of the manner in which power was 
supplied to the calorimeter. This is illustrated in 
Figure 4, which compares the results of experiments 
using the external thin sheet Joule heater with those 
using the electrolytic heater, both with and without 
simultaneous electrolysis taking place. Over a wide 
range of power levels the calibration constant was 
independent of the type of calibration heat source, 
and in this case was equal to 0.83 W/°C with a 
precision to ±0.5 %. 

Figure 3. (a) The variation of Joule heater, electrolysis and total input power 
as a function of time during a calibration experiment using an external thin 
sheet Joule heater. The electrolysis was operated in the constant power 
mode. (b) The corresponding values of the calibration constant, K, as a 
function of time and the input power level. It is clear that K is practically 
independent of the input power level as well as time. 
 
Figure 4. Calibration plot to compare two different ways of introducing 
calibration heat using external thin sheet and electrolytic Joule heaters both 
with and without electrolysis talcing place. 

The variation of the calibration constant with the cell 
temperature is also of interest. The data shown in 
Figure 5 indicate that K is practically constant over a 
wide range of temperature. 


DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 

It has been shown that the novel concentric cylinder 
isoperibolic calorimeter design has consistent and 
attractive features, providing reliable information 
with a high degree of precision. The general design 
feature whereby heat is uniformly distributed 
throughout heavy aluminum cylinders, where the 
temperature measurements are made, eliminates the 
uncertainities associated with the exact nature and 
location of the heat source and the temperature probe. 
It also renders the issue of the adequacy of stirring 
irrelevant, and thus makes these calorimeters 
attractive for the study of the thermal characteristics 
of the electrochemical insertion of deuterium into Pd, 
as well as other electrochemical studies. 

The major construction materials are aluminum and 
alumina, both of which allow operation at quite high 
temperatures, perhaps up to 600 °c. Materials used 
for the construction of the electrochemical cell will be 
the major factor limiting the maximum temperature of 
operation. 

Calibration has been conducted using three different 
modes of introducing calibration heat. The calibration 
constant was found to be independent of whether the 
power was supplied by an immersed Joule heater, 
internal electrolysis, or an external thin film Joule 
heater. This provides flexibility in experiments using 
this design. 

Experiments on the time dependence of the response 
to step changes in the input power level have 
demonstrated 1/e times of about 15 minutes. This 
enables one to observe relatively rapid changes in the 
thermal behavior of electrochemical systems. 

The calibration constants have been found to be 
independent of both time, input power level, and cell 
temperature over quite a wide ranges, with 
uncenainities less than± 0.5 %. 

This high level of precision makes it possible to 
accurately study questions such as the thermal 
behavior of Pd during the electrochemical insertion 
of deuterium. 

Figure 5. Temperature dependence of the calibration constant over a wide 
range of cell temperatures. 


REFERENCES 

1. M. Fleischmann and S. Pons, Jour. Electroanal.
Chem. 261, 301 (1989)
2. Andreas Belzner, Ulrike Bischler, Steven Crouch­
Baker, Turgut M. Giir, George Lucier, Martha
Schreiber, and Robert A. Huggins, to be published
in the Journal of Fusion Energy
3. Andreas Belzner, Ulrike Bischler, Steven Crouch­
Baker, Turgut M. Giir, George Lucier, Martha
Schreiber, and Robert A. Huggins, to be published
in Solid State Ionics
4. Steven Crouch-Baker, Joseph A. Ferrante, Turgut
M. Gtir, George Lucier, Martha Schreiber and
Robert A. Huggins, to be published in the
Proceedings of the NSF-EPRI Workshop on
"Anomalous Effects in Deuterated Metals" that was
held October 16-18, 1989.
