1. - Introduction. 

After the first claims about the so-called ~(cold fusion, phenomenon [1-3] and sev- 
eral different experiments, it has soon became clear that reliable detectors were 
necessary for research in this new and particular field, to avoid measurement errors. 

A new, multiparameter, high-efficiency neutron detector[4] was specifically de- 
signed in Genoa for cold-fusion measurements and used in some typical experiments 
on titanium-deuterium gas systems. Our aim was to verify, with an improved neutron 
sensitivity, the results reported by Scaramuzzi and co-workers [3] and to investigate 
neutron emisssion during high deuterium adsorption in the titanium lattice. In both 
cases no neutron emission was observed in our experiments. Actually, in the first 
case, our experimental conditions, as described in the following, were not completely 
equivalent to the Scaramuzzi ones. 


2. - Experimental 

set-up. 

As shown in fig. I the detector is composed of three cylindrical coaxial scintillators 
shells, each shell being 20cm long and about 5 cm thick [4]. The inner shell is filled 
(*) Due to the relevance of its scientific content, this paper has been given priority by the 
Journal Direction. 
(**) The authors of this paper have agreed to not receive the proofs for correction. 
293 
294 
P. PRATI, G. RICCO, M. TAIUTI, C. BORAGNO, R. EGGENHOFFNER and u. VALBUSA 
side view 
 9 
I 
f-el 
I 
I anticoincidence 
~ 
liquid scintillator 
plastic scintillator 
O 
PM tube 
Fig. 1. - Detector geometry and composition: side view. 
PSD channels 
Fig. 2. - Correlation between pulse pulse shape and pulse height in the liquid scintillator in a 
two-dimensional plot for an Am-Be neutron source. The pulse height is plotted in MeV electron 
equivalent units [4] to take into account the effect of the light yield of a neutron inside organic 
scintillators. 
with NE213 liquid scintillator and the outer two are plastic NE102A. Cadmium 
sheets, 1 mm thick, are interposed between the scintillators to capture neutrons ther- 
realized inside the detector. An anticoincidence cosmic-ray detector is placed over 
the neutron and the whole system is surrounded by a paraffin (20cm)+ copper 
SEARCH FOR NEUTRON EMISSION FROM TITANIUM-DEUTERIUM SYSTEMS 
Fig. 3. - Simulated spectrum of monochromatic neutrons (E = 2.45 MeV) normalized to 100% de- 
tection efficiency. The energy is plotted in Mee (MeV electron equivalent [4]), and the spectrum 
is fitted by f(E~ ) = 0.224/(2=~ 2)1/2 exp [(E~ - 0.41)2/(272)]; ~ = 0.15 Mee. 
energy (Mee) 
Fig. 4. - A typical background spectrum: energy is plotted in Mee and the c.p.s. (counts per sec- 
ond) are multiplied by 103 . 
(2cm) + lead (10cm) wall. A 30cm 3 cylindrical sample can be inserted in the central 
hole. The NE213 light pulse has different decay times when produced by gamma-rays 
or by neutron[5]: a pulse shape discriminator, operating on the inner scintillator 
pulses, efficiently separates gamma from neutron events. Due to the relatively large 
detector dimensions, a very high fraction of neutrons giving a signal in the liquid 
scintillator thermalizes and is captured by the cadmium foils. Each neutron event in 
296 
P. PRATI, G. RICCO, M. TAIUTI, C. BORAGNO, R. EGGENHOFFNER and U. VALBUSA 
C 
V2 
LN2trap 
cell 
Fig. 5. - The deuterium control system. 
~~ 
' D2 
thermocouple 
LN2out ~
 
II I
 
LN2in 
turbomolecular 
pump 
b 
45 mm 
Fig. 6. - The titanium cell and the cryostat. 
the liquid scintillator gives the START to a time-to-amplitude, converter that will 
wait 200 ~s for the STOP from gamma-rays produced by neutron capture on one cad- 
mium sheet and detected by at least one of the three coaxial scintillators. A neutron 
SEARCH FOR NEUTRON EMISSION FROM TITANIUM-DEUTERIUM 
SYSTEMS 
297 
event is identified by two consecutive trigger signals: the first corresponding to a 
neutron-type pulse in the liquid scintillator, and the second to the detection of cap- 
ture gamma-rays within the 200 I~s time window. For each event, the amplitude of the 
summed three scintillators pulses, proportional to the neutron energy, is recorded. 

The acquisition system, based on a CAMAC interface connected to a MICROVAX 
computer, allows off-line multiparameter analysis: as an example in fig. 2 is shown 
the pulse-shape and pulse-height correlation. The signals from the scintillators are 
stored on the computer each minute: in this way time trends can be monitored. The 
detection efficiency for 2.45MeV monochromatic neutrons was determined by two 
Monte Carlo codes [6, 7], tested measuring a calibrated, low-activity Am-Be neutron 
source, and turned out (12.5 _+ 0.5)%. The detector rensponse to 2.45 MeV monochro- 
matic neutrons is shown in fig. 3. A typical background spectrum is shown in fig. 4: 
for neutron energies below 2.45 MeV the background rate is 10 -2 n/s and the detec- 
tion sensitivity, with a 3~ statistical confidence level, turns out 2.4. T -1/2 n/s, where T 
is the measurement time. 

The system used to load titanium with deuterium gas is sketched in fig. 5. Before 
admitting D2 gas in the cell, the system was evacuated up to 10 .6 mbar by a turbo- 
molecular pump. In a second step the gas was inserted in the dead volume (200 cm 3) 
flowing through a liquid-nitrogen trap to promote impurities condensation. Finally, 
the gas was admitted in the cell through the valve V4. A manometer, with sensitivity 
0.2 bar, was used to measure the pressure drop vs. time and then to estimate the ad- :
sorption rate of the titanium. Details of the cell are drawn in fig. 6. Great care was 
used to avoid thermal stresses on the neutron detector; for this reason high vacuum 
was continuously mantained in the external chamber. The temperature of the exter- 
hal wall of the cryostat was monitored by a thermocouple and, in measurement condi- 
tions, it remained close to the room temperature. A second thermocouple was used to 
measure the temperature of the Ti sample. 


3. - Measurements. 

We have performed measurements flowing deuterium gas in two different titani- 
um samples: shavings, of the same kind of those used by Scaramuzzi and co- 
workers [3], and powders. The two situations are separately described and discussed 
in the following: 
a) Titanium shavings: 24 g of titanium shaving were placed inside the cell 
without any kind of thermal treatment. The cell insulation was verified whit He gas 
at several pressures in the range (5 + 25) bar. The background was measured with the 
vacuum system running (rotative and turbo-molecular pumps) and during thermal 
transients from room to liquid-nitrogen temperature. No variation in the background 
level was observed in these tests. The dead volume (see fig. 5) was then filled, at 
room temperature, with deuterium gas at a 16.5 bar pressure and the valve (V4, see 
fig. 4) connecting the dead volume with the cell was opened: neither pressure nor cell 
temperature variations were observed. It is a well-known result, indeed, that no ap- 
preciable hydrogen adsorption can be obtained without any surface preparation [8]. 

In these conditions a 5 h measurement was performed and the neutron rate turned 
out compatible with the background level. After this first step the liquid nitrogen 
was admitted in the cryostat: the cell temperature went down to 77 K in about 10 rain- 
utes, then the liquid nitrogen was closed and the temperature went back to room tern- 
298 
P. PRATI, G. RICCO, M. TAIUTI, C. BORAGNO, R. EGGENHOFFNER and U. VALBUSA 
perature in about 4 hours. This thermal cycle was repeated consecutively 4 times. 

During all the cycles neither pressure variation nor neutron emission greater than 
the background level were observed. 
b) Titanium powders: 32 g of titanium powder then inserted in the cell without 
any preliminary thermal treatment and the dead volume was filled again with 16.5 
bar of deuterium gas: the deuterium was then admitted inside the cell and two mea- 
surement, at room temperature and during a thermal transient, down to 77K and 
back to 300 K, were performed. Once again neither pressure variation nor neutron 
emission were observed. After this first run we have degassed the titanium cell by 
pumping and heating 2 h at 200 ~ 
Temperature was eventually raised up to 560 ~ 
and the cell was maintained at this constant temperature in high vacuum conditions 
for approximately 7h. The temperature ramps in the oven were very slow. After 
these thermal treatments, performed to favour deuterium adsorption, the sample 
was inserted in the detector and the dead volume was filled with 16 bar of deuterium 
gas. When the deuterium was admitted in the cell the pressure went down to zero bar 
in a few minutes and the cell temperature increased up to 600 ~ 
During this fast 
transient a neutron measurement was performed but no emission was detected. 

Then, a long measurement (15 hours) was performed holding the system in the same 
conditions, once again no neutrons emission was observed. After this first loading the 
dead volume was filled again with 10 bar of deuterium gas: when the deuterium was 
admitted in the cell the pressure in the dead volume went down to 8 bar and the cell 
temperature increased by 4 ~ 
We concluded that the sample was now loaded with 
deuterium at the maximum level and in these conditions we performed the following 
measurements: 
a 10 hours run with the titanium-deuterium system in stationary conditions; 
two consecutive runs during thermal transients induced by filling the cryostat 
with liquid nitrogen. These thermal cycles were completely equivalent to those per- 
formed on the titanium shavings. During all the measurements no neutron emission 
was observed. We evaluated, from the dead volume pressure variation, a deuterium- 
to-titanium ratio in the sample of about 0.65. In these runs the ~s parameter, defined 
according to Jones and coworkers [1] as the fusion rate per deuterium pair, was lower 
than 10-25fus/D pair/s. 


4. - Conclusions. 

Some measurements on two deuterium-titanium systems were performed without 
observing any neutron signal above the background level, also with a high deuterium 
adsorption inside the titanium lattice. With the first sample, the experimental condi- 
tions were very similar, but not completely equivalent, to those of Scaramuzzi and co- 
workers [3]. In particular, the thermal transient induced in the cell was slower and 
the multiparameter analysis, performed on the detector signals, had a dead time of 
200~s. The second point could make impossible the detection of ~,neutron burst, 
shorter than the detector dead time; nevertheless we must note that the scintillators 
count rates, for which the dead time is negligible, was fully compatible with the back- 
ground level in all the measurements performed. The same considerations can be ap- 
plied to the second set of measurements. 

As a conclusion, we think that the ,,Scaramuzzi-like, method, that we have fol- 
SEARCH FOR NEUTRON EMISSION FROM TITANIUM-DEUTERIUM SYSTEMS 
299 
lowed, is not reliable because deuterium is not adsorbed in the titanium lattice. Ex- 
perimental configurations with high deuterium adsorption could be still investigated, 
in particular in high stress conditions. 


REFERENCES 

[1] S. E. JONES, E. P. PALMER, J. B. CZIRR, D. L. DECKER, G. L. JENSEN, J. M. THORNE and S. 

F. TAYLOR: Nature, 338, 737 (1989). 
[2] M. FLEISCHMANN, S. PONS and M. HAWKINS: J. Electroanal. Chem., 261, 187, 301 (1989). 
[3] A. DE NINNO, A. FRATTOLILLO, G. LOLLOBATTISTA, L. MARTINIS, M. MARTONE, L. MORI, S. 

PODDA and F. SCARAMUZZI: Europhys. Lett., 9, 221 (1989): Nuovo Cimento A, 101, 841 
(1989). 
[4] G. RICCO, M. ANGHINOLFI, P. CORVISIERO, E. DURANTE, S. MAGGIOLO, P. PRATI, A. ROT- 
TURA and M. TAIUTI: A large solid angle multiparameter neutron detector, in press in Nucl. 

Instrum. Methods. 
[5] F. T. KUCHNIR and F. J. LYNCH: IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., NS-15(9), 107 (1968). 
[6] M. ANGHINOLFI, G. RICCO, P. CORVISIERO and F. MASULLI: Nucl. Instr~m. Methods, 165, 
217 (1979). 
[7] M. TAIUTI, M. ANGHINOLFI, P. CORVISIERO, G. RICCO and A. ZUCCHIATTI: Nucl. Instrttm. 

Methods, 211, 135 (1983). 
[8] M. A. PICK: in Metal Hydrides, edited by G. BAMBAKIDIS (Plenum Press, New York, N.Y., 
1980). 
20 - I1 N~tovo Cimento A 
