1. Introduction

Since "cold fusion" phenomenon was reported by Fleishmann and Pons1)
, excess heat and nuclear products during heavy water electrolysis were reported by many groups. However, it was
difficult to reproduce this phenomenon in most of the groups2)
. We reported slight excess heat ( 5-
7%) with weak neutron emission in energy over 3MeV at ICCF53)
. The aim of this study was to
reproduce our last results and to perform more reliable measurements to search the correlation between excess heat and nuclear products. If nuclear reaction with heat generation takes place in solid
without neutrons, high energy ( several MeV ) charged particle emissions are usually expected.
Therefore, emissions of characteristic X-rays and bremsstrahlung X-rays will be caused by slowingdown of the charged particles in material. Since most of these emissions will be characteristic Xrays, charged particles can be detected indirectly by the detection of the characteristic X-rays. Pd has
been used as the cathode of the heavy water electrolysis in our group. Because characteristic X-rays 

Figure 1 X-ray spectrum of bare CdTe detector
and calculated spectrum of Mo-covered
CdTe detector

Figure 2 X-ray attenuation cross section
of molybdenum ( atomic number= 42)

Figure 3 Measured X - ray energy spectrum of
Mo-covered CdTe detector 

Figure 4 Two dimensional X - ray background spectrum

of Pd K ,and K sare 21-23keV, it is necessary to measure the X-rays of this energy range. A CdTe
solid state detector was chosen to detect these X-rays because of its high efficiency in the energy
less than 90ke V and its compatibility to be used at room temperature.

CdTe detector picks up electromagnetic noise or mechanical noise easily will give a bad influence
upon the accurate measurements. Figure 1 shows the X-ray spectrum of the bare CdTe detector
compared with that of calculated spectrum with CdTe detector covered with molybdenum foil during a heavy water electrolysis run with Ni cathode. If the origin of this spectrum was due to X-rays,
the spectrum of CdTe detector covered with molybdenum foil should look as the lower spectrum in
Figure 1, because X-ray attenuation cross section of molybdenum is like Figure 2
4l_ But actually measured X-ray spectrum using the molybdenum covered detector during the heavy water electrolysis was obtained as shown in Figure 3, from which we could find that the origin of this spectrum
was not totally X-rays. We introduced them two-dimentional pulse-shape and pulse height analysis
to reject the noise signals. Figure 4 shows background X-rays in two dimensional spectrum which
was plotted for rise time of pulse as the axis of abscissa and pulse height on the vertical line. The 
signals of which nse time were ~2 µ sec were accepted as X-ray signals, and the signals <1 µ sec were
rejected as noise signals. Figure 5 shows background
spectrum before rise time discrimination and background spectrum after rise time discrimination. This
rise time discrimination could reject most of noise
signals and slower rise-time events of X-rays. The
electrical circuit of rise time discrimination of CdTe
signals is shown in the next section.

On the other hand, calorimetry and neutron measurements were performed, too. The electrochemical cells
and measurement systems were twin type, and two type experiments were able to be practiced at the
same time, for example heavy water electrolysis and light water electrolysis using Pd cathodes for
both cells. The advantage of this twin experimental system was that simultaneous events happening
in both cells could be rejected as the noises. Using this system, the accurate comparative experiments of cold fusion could be performed for foreground/background or /blank runs. 

Figure 5 Rejection of noise signals


2.Experimental

Figure 6 Schematic diagram of twin-type experimental system 

One power supply
was connected
two cells in series
and supplies the
same electric current. Coolant
(H2O,20 + 0.1 °C)
flow was connected two cells
also in series.
Figure 7 shows
the structure of
open type cell.

Figure 7 Structure of open type cell 

Inner cell wall was made of glass and outer
cell wall was made of acrylic resin. The plate
cathode ( 25 X 25 X 1mm ) was hold by Teflon electrode holder which rolled up the anode wire ( 1mm <t> ). Coolant flowed in the
coolant pipe which was made of glass and
temperature distribution of the electrolyte
was kept uniform by stirrer. The effluent gas
( D2, H2 and 02) which were generated by the
electrolysis went out through the gas outlet.
The electrolyte temperature was measured by
K-type thermocouples. The output power of
electrolysis was linear function of the thermocouple outputs, and the coefficients of the
linear function were determined by the calibration run using Ni cathode in every experiment. The excess energy was determined
by the difference between output power and
input power to the electrolyte. The input
power was expressed by (( cell voltage - 1.5 )
X electrolytic current ) because of gas generation

Figure 8 Block diagram of X-ray measurment system

Figure 8 shows the X-ray measurement system. The CdTe detector (2 X 2mm) was placed in front of
the cell. Using this system, noise components in CdTe signals were distinguished by the rise time
and separated from real X-ray signals. The measurement range of the system was about 6-90keV in 
energy. The detection efficiency of K "
and K " X-rays was 0.076 % and the
measurement system could detect one
event per minute when Pd cathode emitted 1300 photons of this energy per minute. X-ray events are counted every 4
minutes besides spectroscopy. For F cell
at Run 7, high resolution Si-SSD which
was cooled with Peltier device was used
instead of CdTe detector to detect lower
energy X-rays than 6keV.

The n- Y pulse separation technique was
applied to the neutron measurement using an NE213 fast neutron spectrometer,
which was placed in front of the cell, as
shown in Figure 9. The Y -ray component and noise component could be
separated completely by this diagram.
The measurement range of neutron is 0-
9Me V in energy. But one of the NE213
detectors ( for B cell ) could not perform
right measurement in low energy
( <3MeV) because of containment a -particle emitters which are included in this NE213 detector,
so it was used exclusively for higher energy. Neutron events were also counted every 4 minutes in
addition to spectroscopy. 

Figure 9 Block diagram of neutron measurment system 

At most of experiments, the electrolysis current density was changed periodically from LOW ( 160
or 280mNcm2
) to HIGH ( 608 or 640 mNcm2
) or the reverse in every 3 or 6 hours ( L-H mode)
in order to give dynamic change of deuterium accumulation in Pd metal. But for a week at the beginning of electrolysis, the electrolysis current density was kept to be 160mNcm2 constantly
( Constant Mode) in order to keep Pd cathodes from cracking, except for Runs 1-3. The electrolyte
was 0.2M LiOD/heavy water solution. 


3.Results and Discussions

Table 1 shows the summary of the experiments. In the table, Yes means that anomalous events
were observed. 

Table 1 The summary of experiments

Figure 10 Typical example of heat balance
( at Low-High mode)

Figure 11 X - ray energy spectra
using CdTe detector 

Figure 12 X-ray energy spectra
using CdTe detector

Figure 13 X-ray MCS data using CdTe detector

Figure 10 shows the typical data of heat balance when the current density was changed from
160mNcm2 ( L-mode ) to 640mNcm2 ( H-mode) or the reverse in cycle. The excess power during
thermal equilibrium was fluctuated around zero and not exceeding 99% confidence level ( +3 a
and -3 a).

Figure 11 shows the X-ray energy spectrum of Run 1 during heavy water L-H mode electrolysis at
the first week of the electrolysis. This spectrum rising up in the low energy region is regarded as
somewhat similar to electromagnetic noise signals, but it might be soft X-rays of the nuclear
bremsstrahlung by charged particles. The similar spectrum was observed at Run 2 during light water
electrolysis. These results may suggest the possibility of the production of low energy ( less than
200keV) charged particles which generate no characteristic X-rays but do bremsstrahlung X-rays.
At Run 6, the different X-ray spectrum was obtained at first week of Constant Mode electrolysis for
the heavy water electrolysis using Pd cathode which was pre-processed by chemical etching, as 
shown in Figure 12. The MCS data is shown in
Figure 13, where we see X-ray events caused as
bursts. The events might be noise signals because

Figure 14 X - ray and neutron MCS data

Figure 15 Correlation of X-ray and
neutron MCS data 

noise signals always appeared as bursts. Figure 14 shows the MCS data at Run 5 during the Constant Mode heavy water electrolysis using annealed ( 900°C, 10 hour ) Pd cathode. Only for the F
cell which electrolyte was LiOD heavy water solution, neutron and X-ray increased simultaneously
around the time 17hr. Much larger X-ray burst-events after that event were probably noise signals
because there were two simultaneous burst-events for the B cell which electrolyte was LiOH light
water solution. Figure 15 shows the expanded-scale data for the neutron and X-ray coincident event.
Because the time variation of neutron count rate is not identical to that of X-ray's, the origin of
these events would not be the same reaction if these events were signals of some nuclear reactions.
But there is possibility that the triggering conditions of two events will be the same solid-state or
chemical conditions of the Pd cathode. Corresponding spectra of X-ray and neutron could not be
identified, because counts in spectrum channels didn't exceed the statistical error level.

The helium-4 analysis of the gas in used Pd sheet at Run 5 for the F cell by quadrupole mass spectrometer was performed with the gas extraction condition Pd sheet was kept 1150°C for 10 hour
after electrolysis. Helium-4 peak was appeared slightly but that was very marginal and uncertain
level, because of the problem of leaking of air into the gas storage part of the spectrometer oven
during a long heating up process for the Pd sheet.


4.Conclusion

In order to study the correlation between excess heat and nuclear products, the measurements of
heat balance, X-rays and neutrons during heavy water and/or light water electrolysis using Pd cathodes were performed. In this work, the reliable twin system was used. Above all, the X-ray measurement system for the correlation study was improved.

As a result, no excess heat beyond 3 a level was observed. But for only heavy water electrolysis,
X-ray and neutron event occurred simultaneously. Other three X-ray events were observed out of
seven runs for both of heavy water electrolysis and light water electrolysis. And all of them occurred
at the first week of the electrolysis. The energy spectra of X-ray were not characteristic X-ray's but
looked like the bremsstrahlung's. But these X-ray spectra were also similar to noise signal's. The
simultaneous X-ray measurements by a bare detector and a detector covered with metal foil as described at introduction will be needed in future to prove that these X-rays were not noise signals but
genuine soft X-ray signals.


References

1) M. Fleischmann, et al., 1989, J. Electroanal.Chem., 261,301
2) E. Storms, "Critical Review of the "Cold Fusion "Effect", 1995
3) A. Takahashi, et al., 1995, Proc. 5th Conf. on Cold Fusion,
4) E. B. Saloman, et al., 1988, Atomic Data and Nuclear Data Tables, 38, 1

