1. INTRODUCTION

This talk will not be a summary of the theoretical contributions to this Conference: I think
that the individual papers that this book collects can give a much better representation of the
work that is now going on in the field than I can possibly attempt to give in a short talk. As a
partial excuse I may quote a recent review article of mine[l1, where I try to discuss the most
significant theories of cold fusion, and the fact that nothing much new has happened in the last
few months. Nor will I discuss cold fusion in the non-equilibrium conditions prevailing in
Titanium[2J, fracto-emission[3J and 'lukewarm' fusion[4)_

I shall rather try to examine first the strange facts of hydrogen incorporation into
Palladium, and then I shall discuss the phenomena of cold fusion in relation to those facts. In
the light of the known experimental data I will then discuss the general features of what we
might call 'possible' and 'impossible' theories of cold fusion, somehow drawing a demarcation
line between which theoretical ideas can and cannot explain those observations, given the well
established and accepted general laws of condensed matter (Quantum Electro Dynamics, QED)
and nuclear physics (Quantum Chromo Dynamics, QCD).

My discussion will follow quite closely a paper recently completed in collaboration with
M. Fleischmann and S. Pons[5)_


2. FACTS

As Martin Fleischmann and Stanley Pons have explained us time and again they were
induced to undertake a work « ... that was initiated on the strength of a calculation that no
moderately intelligent graduate student, let alone experienced electrochemists, ought to take
seriously ... »[6] by their being puzzled by the odd behaviour of Hydrogen - and its isotopes -
when inserted in a host metal lattice, like Palladium. Let me try to briefly list and describe the
strange facts that captured the imagination of our friends.

- High concentration of Hydrogen in Pd
When a piece of Pd is put in an atmosphere of gaseous Hydrogen at normal pressure it
soakes a large quantity of the gas spontaneously and exothermally up to a ratio
x = H Pd ::: 0.6. In order to get much higher x one needs very large pressures; in any case with accessible
pressures one cannot reach from gaseous Hydrogen the apparently relevant 'threshold' x= 1
(see later)C71.

- High Hydrogen mobility
The anomalously high mobility of Hydrogen in Pd, in particular its being accelerated by
electric fields shows that Hydrogen and its isotopes (D and T) in Pd exist in their nuclear (not
atomic) state, immersed in a very dense plasma of d-electrons[8J. And the natural question is:
why highly compressed Hydrogen does not form?

- High HID separation factor at equilibrium
In equilibrium conditions H and D exhibit a high separation factor, completely consistent
with a statistical mechanics model based on delocalized classical oscillators showing high
affinity for Pd.
In order to appreciate the latter statement let us consider two possible Born-Haber cycles

FIG. I - Two possible Born-Haber cycles for p Pd-H. 

One sees that one obtains solvation potentials of Hydrogen in Pd of the order of several 
e V's, a most noteworthy physical phenomenon. 
- Large diffusion coefficients - Inverse isotope effect
Transport measurements show that the diffusion coefficients D of Hydrogen in Palladium 
are of the order of 10-7 cm2 sec-I - a very large value - and are ordered as[9] 
The inversion of the diffusion coefficients of D and T, that runs contrary to what one 
would have expected from their masses, is a kind of 'inverse isotope effect', which is also 
observed for the critical temperatures of the superconducting Pd - hydrides (To> T H)[IOl. 
- High chemical potential of dissolved Hydrogen
All these facts can be assembled to build the 'Scenario' reported in Table I. 

Let us now turn our attention to the facts of Cold Fusion (CF) as we have learned them in 
the last two years. 
• Sporadicity, variability, metallurgical factors
The phenomenology that has accumulated so far shows that the 'irreproducibility' of the 
CF phenomena is most likely tied to the large number of relevant parameters and even to path­
dependences in the space of parameters. 
• Low T-levels, n/y«l, absence of y-rays and secondary n's
The nuclear physics of CF has been since the beginningU 11 (March 1989) a tremendous
puzzle, why the outgoing channels are not 3T + I H and 3He + in 1 : 1 proportion, like it 
happens in the vacuum? Indeed this dramatic discrepancy has convinced the majority of 
· physicists that CF phenomena must be a bogus.
• Bursts in T, n production
Are they due to non-equilibrium conditions?[12] 
• High energy T, n and protons[13]
Unconventional nuclear physics? 
• Soft X-rays
As shown by Szpak's (14) and Miles' (15) dental films.
• 4He unaccompanied by high energy y rays
As shown by the beautiful experiments of Melvin Miles and collaborators[15l. 
• Excess enthalpy production far above that corresponding to T + n production
In particular the new results of Fleischmann and Pons[16], that have been corroborated 
by Wilford Hansen's independent analysis[17l, indicate powers of kW/cm3. 

The scenario that originates from assembling these facts together is reported in Table II. 


3. - POSSIBLE AND IMPOSSIBLE THEORIES

We shall now try to bring the 'facts' and the scenarios of the preceding Section to bear 
upon the key question of this talk, namely which of the the proposed theories are possible, and 
which among them, on the other hand, are impossible. But before going into the specifics, it is 
important to set down a clear demarcation between possible and impossible theories, which 
might run as follows: 
Any ' possible' theory must explain the new phenomena (facts) without 'unexplaining' 
the old 
To this we may add the corollary: the old theory (ies) which does not explain the new 
phenomena cannot be used against the new theory in the realm where the old theory 'worked'. 

Or, said differently, the 'successes' of the old theory cannot be·taken as evidence that there is 
no need of different explanations of those successes. 
3a - Hydrogen and its Isotopes in Pd 
According to the scenario of Table I inside and at the surface of Pd there must exist very 
strong electrostatic fields.We realize at once that these fields must be able to polarize the 
Hydrogen molecule so strongly as to break it into its elementary components - p, d, T and 
electrons -, thus piercing through an energy barrier which is as high as.:: 30 eV. The 'deep 
potential holes' that are created by such fields, however, cannot have gradients that exceed ~ 
70eV / 0.5 A, for otherwise 4He would also exist in the form of an a-particle, and this is 
contradicted by observations. This fact nicely disposes of the arguments, embodied in the 
Baym-Leggett TheoremC181, that were made against CF. Indeed, in the Pd lattice the observed 
behaviour of 4He is completely different from that of pairs of D's, contrary to the 'reasonable' 
assumptions of Ref. [ 18]. 

From the very existence of the  -phase the number of 'deep holes' (with electric fields 30 eV /A< IE I <140 eV / A ) must exceed x  = 0.6, and the well known difficulty -of charging the Pd electrodes above x .:: 1 makes it plausible that the number of such holes equals 
just the number of Pd-nuclei. Here, however, a severe difficulty shows up: how can we 
reconcile the existence of such 'deep holes' with the fact that Hydrogen is delocalized? The 
oddity of this fact puts all the generally accepted theories, based on two-body electrostatic 
forces between matter constituents, in the category of IMPOSSIBLE THEORIES. 

Also the magnitudes and the inverted ordering (Do+ >DH + >DJ+) of diffusion constants 
speak against" the usual theorie , for they appear to require the existence of collective 
bosonic/fermionic states for the Hydrogen 'plasma'. 

We may thus draw a fundamental demarcation between POSSIBLE AND IMPOSSIBLE 
THEORIES of Hydrogen in Pd in their allowance for collective many-body phenomena. 

In models invoking explicity the existence of collective phenomena[l,I91 the 'deep holes' 
that must form in roughly 1 : 1 proportion originate from coherent plasma oscillations of d­
electrons. The difficult problem of 'delocal zation' can be solved by imagining that the 
collective dynamics makes the Hydrogen state deep in the potential wells unstable. This can 
 nly happen if there are interactions other than electrostatic which provide the necessary 
negative interaction energy that allows the Hydrogen to occupy highly excited (delocalized) 
states in the potential well. 

The only theoretical proposal, known to me, that achieves just that is the simplified model 
of plasma that is discussed in Ref. [20]. According to this model, as long as the charged 
particle of a plasma moves in a harmonic potential, its coupling to the e.m. quantum modes 
with the frequency co= COp (COp is the plasma frequency) will lift it up indefinitely, its excitation 
stopping when strong non-harmonicities appear. 

This means that the Hydrogen nuclei will go to band states of the deep ( ~ 100 e V) 
potential that are highly delocalized, and in such circumstances all other properties discussed in 
the preceding Section appear to find a natural explanation. 
3b - Nuclear Fusion Processes in Pd
As discussed in Ref. [I] the difficult problems that must be dealt with by any theory of 
these phenomena are two: 
(i) How can the Coulomb barrier be penetrated at such large rates?
(ii) How can the process avoid the restrictions posed by 'Asymptotic Freedom' (AF)?

As for problem (i), all simple evaluations of 'tunnelling' probabilities lead to estimates 
that are 50-60 orders of magnitude much too small! Regarding problem (ii) one must notice 
that, even if the former severe difficulty could be resolved, there remains the even more severe 
difficulty that fusion in the lattice does not proceed experimentally in the same way as in hot­
fusion processes. 

In particular, the discoveries of high excess enthalpy uncorrelated to T-production and of 
the large T/n ratio imply that the lattice must play a fundamental role and, consequently, AF, 
with its implications of independence of nuclear processes from lattice dynamics, must be 
violated in a fundamental way. Besides a deep reason for the violation of AF, a good theory 
should also give some explanation of variability, dependence on x, bursts in T and n and 
generation of high energy n, p and T. 

Getting now to the proposed theories of the penetration of the Coulomb banier, I note 
that a simple application of the Gamow-formula (which contains essentially all the 'juice' of the 
problem of the penetration of the Coulomb barrier) requires the existence of a screening 
potential of about 100 e V, just in order to enhance the naive estimates of fusion rates by the 50 
orders of magnitude necessary to account for the relatively rare neutron emission processes. 

All POSSIBLE theories must thus include at least a semiquantitative explanation and 
estimate of screening potentials of such size. IMPOSSIBLE are those theories which do not 
consider explicitly this problem[22J. 

Among IMPOSSIBLE theories, I note those which try to avoid the banier either by 
having 'off-shell' neutrons to initiate the fusion process[IJ, or 'on-shell' neutrons that originate 
from an incoherent exchange of energy with the latticef23J. Equally IMPOSSIBLE is to have 
tight De bound states up to 300 F (Hydrons)f24J, which appear in clear conflict with known 
phenomenology. 

On the other hand the superradiant plasmas considered in Ref. [20] do provide for such 
screening in a natural wayl25]_ 
The necessary violation of AF puts all theories based on the usual, electrostatic view of 
condensed matter interactions among the IMPOSSIBLE theories. For in a lattice governed by 
short-range forces no room for such striking phenomenon can be found: indeed, with such 
forces there is absolutely no way in which the space-times of a lattice oo-8 cm and 10-15 sec) 
can influence the space-times of a fusion process 00-12 cm, 10-21 sec). I note in passing that 
similar mismatches occur in the physics of the Mossbauer effect, putting this well known 
phenomenon in the category of natural mysteries - at least within the conventioned picture of 
condensed matterl26J. POSSIBLE theories of CF must take due account of these odd collective 
phenomena, which the theory of superradiant plasmas explains naturally. 

Recall, in fact, that the theoretical analysis based on superradiant behaviourf19] explicitly 
violates AF and provides estimates of the rates of 4He (plus excess heat), T and n-production in 
reasonable agreement with known phenomenology. In particular, the production of 4He 
unaccompanied by y-rays demands a very fast (~lQ-21 sec) energy transfer to the lattice 
electrons (which then will release it away in various ways: heat, ultraviolet light, x-rays ... ). 

Without a macroscopic quantum behaviour the impossibility of any theoretical description is 
clearly seen by computing the velocity u of such transfer from the site of fusion (somewhere
inside the lattice) to the nearest atom(~ 3 A away), one has 
3A
I 
u -
10-21 sec =
c . 

Remember the EPR paradox? Something like it seems to be occurring here£27]. 

Getting now to the sporadicity of some CF phenomena I would like to note that the theory 
which invokes the existence of heavy charged particle showering the earth from outer space[28J, 
though a logical possibility, appears rather unlikely. On the other hand the existence of a 
threshold at x::: 1, as discussed in Ref. [29], seems a more likely explanation. Furthermore 
lattice defects, dislocations etc. interfering with the basic electron cooling mechanism 
responsible for the production of y-less 4He[l,l9J, might naturally explain T-production. It is 
clear, however, that along these lines a lot of work needs to be done. 


4 - CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK 

I would like to end this talk with a few 'lapidary' statements, that try to capture the 
essence of my analysis. 
• CF exists, its phenomenology is diverse but coherent, and reproduced by many different
groups in different conditions.
• No previously known law of nature (QED and QCD) appear to be violated by CF
phenomena.
• Deductions from these laws of nature, based on the generally accepted notion of AF, belong
to the class of IMPOSSIBLE THEORIES.
• The key ingredient to construct POSSIBLE THEORIES is
MACROSCOPIC QUANTUM MECHANICS (Macro QM)
which originates from Quantum Field Theory (QFf) as applied to complex systems.

Let me note that a demarcation is seen to be emerging between simple (micro QM) and 
complex (Macro QM) systems and of their theoretical description. It appears that a powerful, 
detailed, correct theory of CF must be constructed along the lines of a macroscopic Quantum 
Mechanics, induced by long-range electromagnetic (radiative) interactionsf20l, i.e. according to 
QFf of Superradiance. 

I hope that the next few years will see a lot of work along these lines. CF will then be 
looked upon not only as a magnificent gift to energy-hungry mankind, but as an essential 
window to the deep and subtle behaviours of condensed muier, which have remained hidden 
for such a long time. 


REFERENCES AND FOOTNOTES 

[1) G. Preparata, Some theories of Cold Fusion: A review, Fusion Tech. 20 .(1991) 82.

A De Ninno et al., Europhys. Lett. 2., (1989) 221; H.O. Menlove et al., J. Fusion Energy
2., (1990) 495  for a nice review see M. Srinivasan, 'Current Science' (1991).

V .A. Kluyev et al., Sov. Tech. Phys. Lett. .U (1986) 551.

R. J. Buehler et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 63 (1989) 1292.
[5] M. Fleischmann, S. Pons and G. Preparata, Possible and impossible theories of Cold
Fusion, preprint MITH 91/23 (1991).

B. Pippard, Nature 350 (1991) 29.

For a recent discussion of the many aspects of Hydrogen in Pd see L. Schlapbach (ed.)
'Hydrogen in Intermetallic Compounds' Vol. 1 in Topics in Applied Physics Vol 63'
Springer Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg (1988).

The best evidence for this behaviour comes from the Hall effect, see A. H. Verbraggen,
R. Griessen and J. H. Rector, Phys. Rev. Lett. 52 (1986) 1625.

See for instance J. Volkl and G. Alefeld, in Hydrogen in Metals I, eds. G. Alefeld and
J. Volkl; Springer: Topics Appl. Phys. 28, 1978 Berlin, p. 321.
[10] T. Soskiewicz, Phys. Status Solidi All (1972) k123; B. Stritzker and W. Buckl,
Z. Phys. 257 (1972) 1.
[11] M. Fleischmann, S. Pons and M. Hawkins, J. Electroanal. Chem 261 (1989) 301; for
some corrections ibid 263 (1989) 187.
[12] J. O'M. Bockris, G. H. Liu and N. J. Packham, Fusion Tech . .IB (1990) 11.
[13] T. N. Claytor et al., Proc. Anomalous Nucl. Effects in Deuterium Systems, Provo, Utah,
October 1990; A. Takahashi et al., Fusion Tech., 12 (1991).
[14] S. Szpak et al. J. Electroanal. Chem., 302 (1991) 255; and S. Szpak's contribution in
these Proceedings.
[15) B. F. Bush et al., J. Electroanal. Chem., 304 (1991) 271; and M. Miles' contribution in 
these Proceedings. 
[16] S. Pons, these Proceedings.
[17) W. Hansen, these Proceedings.
[18) A. J. Leggett and G. Baym, Nature 340 (1989) 45.
[19) T. Bressani, E. Del Giudice and G. Preparata, Nuovo Cimento 101A (1989) 845;
G. Preparata, First Annual Conference on Cold Fusion, Conference Proceedings
National Cold Fusion Institute, Salt Lake City (USA), 1990, p. 91.
[20] G. Preparata, Quantum Field Theory of Superradiance, in Problem of Foundamental
Modem Physics, Ed. by R. Cherubini, P. Dal Piaz and B. Minetti (World Scientific,
Singapore) 1990.
[21] J. Schwinger, First Annual Conference on Cold Fusion, Conference Proceedings,
National Cold Fusion Institute, Salt Lake City (USA); 1990, p. 130.
[22) A discussion of typical theories of this sort can be found in Ref. 1, see also Ref. [21]. 
[23] P. Hagelstein, these Proceedings.
[24] F. Meyer, these Proceedings.
[25] M. Baldo in these Proceedings appears to be thinking along these lines.
[26] T. Bressani, E. Del Giudice and G. Preparata, What makes a crystal stiff enough for the
Mossbauer effect? Preprint MITH 90/6 (to be published).
[27] Nevertheless, notes are being circulated by S.E. Jones who on the basis of such
'paradox' pretends to prove that excess enthalphy generation a la Fleischmann Pons is
impossible, hence wrong.
[28] J. Rafelski et al., Fusion Tech.18. (1990) 136.
[29] M. Mc. Kubre, these Proceedings.
