1. Introduction

The primary near-term objectives of the Energetics Technologies experimental program in the
quest for developing commercial cold fusion energy sources are: (1) Improvement of the
reproducibility of high power gain and high energy gain excess heat generation, and (2)
Extension of the duration of excess heat generation. The program focuses on experiments with
electrolytic cells that are driven by SuperWaves. [1-3]. The idea of using SuperWaves to enhance
LENR (Low Energy Nuclear Reactions) was proposed by I. Dardik based on his vision of nature
described in [4].

Several experimental approaches are being pursued in an attempt of achieving the near-term
objectives, including the following:


Optimization of the SuperWave pattern


Modification of the cathode surface by special annealing-etching procedures jointly under
development with ENEA Frascati and the University of Rome [5]


Modification of the cathode surface by SuperWave glow discharge etching [3]


Development of new types of cathodes [3]


Use of ultrasound cavitation in the electrolyte in the vicinity of the cathode for in-situ
cleaning and activation of the cathode surface, generation of dislocations, assistance in
loading and inducing excitation in the Pd-D system.

This paper is an overview of the latter approach. The other approaches listed above were
reported upon in preceding conferences [1-3]. Successful replication of earlier Energetics
Technologies excess heat generating electrolysis experiments were achieved at both the SRI and
the ENEA laboratories as reported in reference [6].

A description of the SuperWave principle can be found in previous publications [1-4] and will
not be repeated here. Section 2 describes the electrolysis cells with ultrasonic transmitters
developed and used by Energetics Technologies. Examples of excess heat generated in ultrasonic
excited electrolysis cells are presented in Section 3. That is followed by a discussion, in Section
4, of the functions of the ultrasound cavitation. A summary of high excess heat generation results
obtained so far in our experiments is given in Section 5.


2. Electrolysis Cells with Ultrasonic Excitation

Since its early days, Energetics Technologies planned to conduct experiments that combine
ultrasonic excitation with electrolysis [1]. The designs of our electrolysis cells with ultrasonic
excitation have undergone a number of conceptual variations.

Presently we have three cylindrical electrolysis cells designed to allow ultrasonic cavitation
excitation. These cells are immersed in a water bath that incorporates a flow calorimeter. The
ultrasonic transmitter or transmitters are located outside of the water bath. The entire system is
housed in an incubator that maintains the experimental setup in a tightly regulated ambient
temperature. The uncertainty in the determination of the excess heat, Pex, using the calibrated
mass-flow calorimeter is approximately 20 mW.

Experimental cells #1 and #2 use an annular piezo ceramic ultrasonic transmitter surrounding
the water bath as shown in Fig. 1. The cathode-anode assembly used in these cells is shown in
Fig. 2. The cathode is a palladium foil, 60 × 3.0 × 0.03 mm. It is made at Energetics
Technologies by rolling a 0.5 or 1.0 mm thick Pd wire. The anode is a helical platinum wire
wound around the cathode over a perforated cylinder of Teflon (See Fig. 2).

Cell #3 uses four tubular ultrasonic transmitters located 90 degrees from each other as shown
in Figs. 3 and 4. The design of the anodes was modified for this geometrical arrangement, as
shown in Fig. 6 (compare with Fig. 2).

Figure. 1. Schematic of the Energetics Technologies electrolytic cell system with an annular ultrasonic-
transmitter; Cells #1 and 2. Flow calorimetry is performed by comparing temperatures T Inlet and T Outlet

Figure 2. The cathode-anode assembly used in the Energetics Technologies electrolytic cells #1 and #2 that
have annular ultrasonic-transmitters

Figure 3. The hardware of the flow calorimeter of Energetics Technologies electrolytic cell #3 that
incorporates four tubular ultrasonic transmitters

Figure 4. Energetics Technologies electrolytic cell #3 assembly installed inside a constant temperature
incubator.

Figure 5. The cathode-anode assembly of Energetics Technologies electrolytic cell #3

The maximum power level and frequencies that the ultrasonic transmitters can operate at in the
three electrolytic cells are summarized in Table 1.

Table 1. Characteristics of Energetics Technologies Electrolysis Cells with Ultrasonic
Transmitters


3. Results

Table 2 gives a statistical summary of the electrolysis experiments performed during 2007 and
2008 using the three ultrasonic excitation electrolysis cells. Seventeen additional experiments
failed because of mechanical problems: mainly palladium foil rupture caused by cavitation. The
reproducibility of excess heat generation is quite high; it is higher than the reproducibility
obtained in our previous electrolysis experiments that did not incorporate ultrasonic cavitation.

Table 2. Summary of Energetics Technologies Electrolysis Experiments Using Ultrasonic
Excitation

Figures 6 through 11 show examples of excess heat generation measured in electrolysis
experiments with ultrasonic excitation. In these experiments, ultrasonic excitation was applied
for several periods, each lasting as long as 24 hours, while electrolysis power was continuously
applied. The figures show: net input power, Pinet – the power delivered to the cell from the
external power supply driving the electrolysis (Pin) minus the power consumed for
decomposition of heavy water molecules; and Pout – the power transferred out from the cell as
measured by the calorimeter. The Coefficient Of Performance (COP) is defined as (Pout-Pinet)/Pin.

Figure 6 shows that excess heat started in experiment ETUS3-5 about 5 days after the
beginning of the experiment. The vertical pink spikes in the figure are heating effects due to the
application of the ultrasonic transmitter and are ignored in the excess-heat analysis. Sometime
between day 20 and day 30 of the experiment, the excess heat level was ~0.2 W, while the net
input energy was ~1 W. Around the 31th day, electrolysis was turned off, but excess heat
generation continued and even increased up to ~0.5 W. This “heat-after-death” lasted for about 4
days, at which time (around the 35th day) the electrolysis current was turned on again. At day 56,
after ramping Pin up and down in a stepwise manner, Pin was turned off again but Pout continued
for several days at a level of ~0.6 watts, before it started dropping. On the 60th day the Pd
cathode was replaced with a Pt cathode, following which Pout became zero. This proves that our
calorimeter was well calibrated. It also proves that the excess heat measured after electrolysis
was turned off was, indeed, heat-after-death.

Figure 6. Net input power (Pinet – in blue) and output power (Pout – in violet) in ultrasonically excited
electrolysis experiment #ETUS3-5 in cell #3

Figure 7 shows the evolution of Pinet and Pout in experiment #ETUS3-6. The ultrasonic
transmitters were turned on 4 times, for 24 hours each time, while the electrolysis power was set
at a low Pin level of less than 0.2 W. After the first session of ultrasonic excitation the output
power gradually dropped to zero. After the second session of ultrasonic excitation Pout dropped to
zero and then started increasing. The third session was soon started1. After the 3rd session of
ultrasonic excitation Pout dropped to zero at which time the 4th session of ultrasonic excitation
was applied. Pin dropped to zero, then increased up to ~1 W, and then gradually declined. The
duration of excess heat generation was 17 days and the maximum COP exceeded 500%. At about
2,400,000 seconds (approximately 28 days) Pin was turned off. Following this Pout dropped to
zero. Applying Pin again did not succeed in reviving the excess heat generation. These last two
steps again provide strong evidence that the excess heat recorded earlier in this experiment is
real, and not a result of improper calibration.

Figure 7. Net input power (Pinet – in black) and output power (Pout – in red) in ultrasonically excited
electrolysis experiment #ETUS3-6 in cell #3. Ultrasound (US) was applied in 4 sessions, each lasting about
24 h

Similar features are observed in the three additional experimental results shown in Figs. 8
through 10.

Figure 8. Net input power (Pinet – in black) and output power (Pout – in red) in ultrasonically excited
electrolysis experiment #ETUS1-17 in cell #1

Figure 9. Net input power (Pinet – in black) and output power (Pout – in red) in ultrasonically excited
electrolysis experiment #ETUS2-11 using cell #2

Figure 10. Net input power (Pinet – in black) and output power (Pout – in red) in ultrasonically excited
electrolysis experiment #ETUS3-20 using cell #3

Figure 11. Net input power (Pinet – in black) and output power (Pout – in red) in ultrasonically excited
electrolysis experiment #ETUS3-21 using cell #3


4. Unique Characteristics of Ultrasonic Excited Electrolysis

Unique characteristics of ultrasonic excited electrolysis experiments include the following:


Very high deuterium loadings (D/Pd > 0.95) is achieved, while applying low current
density


The deuterium stays in the palladium a long time after shutdown (the β phase is stable)


Sub-micron sized pits are found on the surface of palladium cathode, in high density


Craters with signs of melting (and some craters without melting) are found on the surface
of the palladium cathodes

A comparison between Figs. 12 - 14 and Figs. 15 and 16 illustrate the fact that the application
of ultrasonic cavitation, together with the application of SuperWaves electrolysis, enables very
high deuterium loading using exceptionally low current densities. This remarkable increase in
the deuterium loading may be attributed to the following phenomena induced by cavitation:


Cleaning various deposits from the cathode surface


Activating the cathode surface


Increasing the cathode effective surface area

Figure 12. Very high D loading in Pd is obtained in ultrasonically excited electrolysis when driven with low
current density – example 1

Figure 13. Very high D loading in Pd is obtained in ultrasonically excited electrolysis when driven with low
current density – example 2

Figure 14. Very high D loading in Pd is obtained in ultrasonically excited electrolysis when driven with low
current density – example 3

Figure 15. D loading in Pd without ultrasonically excited electrolysis experiment is lower even at significantly
higher current density – example 1

Figure 16. D loading in Pd without ultrasonically excited electrolysis experiment is lower even at significantly
higher current density – example 2

Figure 17 compares the rate of deuterium desorption from two Pd cathodes after turning
electrolysis off. The sample in the top plot was subjected to ultrasonic excitation, while the
sample in the bottom plot was not. The difference is remarkable. Note that from the time the Pd
foil was removed from the cell to the beginning of the X-Ray diffraction analysis used to
measure the D/Pd atom ratio, the D/Pd ratio in the palladium foil in the bottom plot dropped
from more than 0.9 to ~0.4, while the D/Pd ratio in top plot (palladium foil exposed to ultrasonic
cavitation) remained close to 1.0. During the D/Pd analysis period, the rate of desorption from
the palladium foil that was exposed to cavitation is far slower: the β phase appears to be stable
for over 100 days. This unique phenomenon may be due to the formation, by cavitation, of a high
concentration of defects in the palladium. These defects can act as potential deuterium traps
causing slow deuterium desorption.

Figure 17. Rate of deuterium desorption from a Pd cathode that was subjected to ultrasonic cavitation (“US
activation”) (top), versus a Pd cathode that was subjected regular electrolysis (bottom)

Figure 18 compares the surface of the Pd cathode after ultrasonic assisted electrolysis
experiment #ETUS3-6 (left) with the surface of the cathode of electrolysis experiment #64
(right) that was not exposed to ultrasonic cavitation. The morphology of the two cathodes is very
different. The cavitation introduces considerable changes in the structure of the Pd surface.
Regular electrolysis (right) produces a structure consisting of slip bands formed in the course of
plastic deformation of the palladium, due to deuterium absorption and resulting lattice expansion.
Cavitation plus electrolysis (left) leads to the formation of a cellular structure. This effect results
in activation of a surface and creates a high concentration of defects – potential deuterium traps.

Figure 18. Comparison of Pd cathode surface after experiment ETUS3-6 (left) and ETE-64 (right; no
ultrasonic) – both gave excess heat. Secondary electron microscope image magnification of x8000

Craters of various shapes and dimensions were formed on the surfaces of several of the
palladium cathodes subjected to ultrasonic excited electrolysis. Figure 19 shows samples. Some
of the craters show clear signs of palladium melting on and near the surface. The craters are
typically several microns in diameter and several microns deep.

Figure 19. Example of craters found on the surface of palladium cathodes that were subjected to electrolysis
with intermittent application of ultrasound cavitation.

Consider, for example, the crater at the top center of Fig. 19. It is ~4 microns in diameter and
~6 microns deep. The amount of energy required to melt the mass of palladium from this crater
(ignoring heat losses via conduction to the surrounding palladium and to the electrolyte) is on the
order of 0.1 milli-Joules. This is many orders of magnitude smaller than the measured excess
heat, which was on the order of tens to thousands of kilojoules. Remember, though, that the
palladium is in direct contact with the electrolyte, and the heat transfer rate from the palladium to
the electrolyte should be very high. So it is surprising that some spots in the cathode even reach
the melting point of Pd (1554°C).

The craters identified so far have been found in a very small fraction of the total cathode
surface that can be scanned using a SEM. Better diagnostics will be needed to obtain statistically
significant information on the number and types of craters, and their spatial distribution.


5. Summary of Best Excess Heat Generating Experiments at Energetics Technologies

Table 3 summarizes selected performance characteristics of the eight electrolysis experiments
that so far generated the largest amount of excess power, Px (previously referred to as excess
heat), or excess energy, Ex. The average “specific excess power,” given in watts per gram of
palladium that was exposed to the electrolyte, is a measure of the utilization effectiveness of the
palladium. The largest average specific excess power obtained so far – nearly 70 W/g of Pd, is
even higher than the typical specific power in commercial fission reactors – 20 to 50 Watts per
gram of uranium. The “specific excess energy,” expressed in kilo-electron-volt generated per
palladium atom or per deuterium atom in the cathode (the ratio of D to Pd atoms in the cathode is
nearly 1), is an indicator of whether or not the excess heat could be chemical or mechanical
(stored energy) in origin.

The maximum specific excess energy obtained in our electrolysis experiment is over 20 KeV
per Pd or D atom. This is to be compared with heat of desorption of D from the Pd lattice of ~0.3
eV per D atom; heat of D oxidation of ~1.3 eV per D atom; heat of molarization of ~2.2 eV per
D atom; heat of melting (an upper bound on the possible mechanical energy storage in the Pd
lattice) of ~0.2 eV per Pd atom and heat of evaporation of Pd of ~4 eV per Pd atom. All of these
are three to four orders of magnitude smaller than the specific excess energy measured. This
provides a strong yet indirect indication that the excess energy generated in the experiments
reported above is, indeed, of nuclear origin.

Table 3. Selected Characteristics of the Eight Energetics Technologies (ET) Electrolysis
Experiments that Generated Largest Amount of Excess Power or Excess Energy. The highest
value in each row is highlighted in yellow.


6. Conclusions

In-cell exposure of palladium cathodes to ultrasound cavitation, combined with SuperWave
electric current driven electrolysis, was found to enable remarkably high deuterium loading with
surprisingly low current density. The rate of deuterium desorption from palladium cathodes
removed from ultrasonic-assisted electrolysis cells was found to be remarkably slow: the
palladium remained in beta phase loading for many days. The outer layer of palladium foils
exposed to ultrasonic cavitation experiences a large plastic deformation that is characterized by a
highly pitted rough surface. Craters showing clear signs of palladium melting were found on
palladium cathodes that underwent ultrasonic excitation during electrolysis. Better diagnostics
will be required to analyze these craters.

The most reproducible excess heat generation of all experiments performed so far at Energetics
Technologies has been obtained with ultrasonic excitation. Several episodes of “heat-after-death”
were observed during some of the ultrasonically excited experiments. It is necessary to optimize
the application of the ultrasound to minimize the energy needed to generate the cavitation versus
the amount of excess energy generated. The mechanism by which ultrasonic excitation
intensifies the excess heat also needs to be thoroughly investigated.

Significant amounts of excess power and excess energy were generated and very large
Coefficient Of Performance (COP) were obtained in several of Energetics Technologies
experiments. The best performance parameters obtained so far are:


Excess energy

3.5 MJ:

Excess power
34 W


COP
3000%


Duration
40 days


Specific energy
27 KeV per Pd or D atom


Specific power
70 W/g Pd

The latter can be appreciated when compared against the 20 to 50 W/g of uranium that is
achieved in large commercial fission power reactors.


References

1. I. Dardik, H. Branover, A. El-Boher, D. Gazit, E. Golbreich, E. Greenspan, A. Kapusta, B.
Khachaturov, V. Krakov, S. Lesin, B. Michailovitch, G. Shani And T. Zilov, “Intensification
of Low Energy Nuclear Reactions Using SuperWaves Excitation,” Proc. of the Tenth
International Conference on Cold Fusion ICCF-10, Cambridge, MA, August 2003.
2. I. Dardik, T. Zilov, H. Branover, A. El-Boher, E. Greenspan, B. Khachaturov, V. Krakov, S.
Lesin and M. Tsirlin, “Excess Heat in Electrolysis Experiments at Energetics Technologies,”
Presented at the 11th International Conference on Cold Fusion, ICCF-11, Marseilles, France,
November 1 - 6, 2004.
3. I. Dardik, “SuperWaves Reality,” Proc. of the Tenth International Conference on Cold
Fusion ICCF-10, Cambridge, MA, August 2003.
4. I. Dardik, T. Zilov, H. Branover, A. El-Boher, E. Greenspan, B. Khachaturov, V. Krakov, S.
Lesin, A.Shapiro and M. Tsirlin, “Report on Electrolysis Experiments at Energetics
Technologies,” Proc. of the 13th International Conference on Cold Fusion ICCF-13, Sochi,
Russia, June 25-July 1, 2007.
5. V. Violante, F. Sarto, E.Castagna,C. Sibilia, M.Bertolotti, R. Li Voti, G.Leahu, M. McKubre,
F. Tanzella, K.Grabowski, G.Hubler, D. Knies,T. Zilov and I. Dardik, “ Calorimetric Results
of ENEA Cooperative Experiments,” Proc. of the 13th International Conference on Cold
Fusion ICCF-13, Sochi, Russia, June 25-July 1, 2007.
6. M. C. H. McKubre, F. L. Tanzella, I. Dardik, A. El Boher, T. Zilov, E. Greenspan, C. Sibilia
and V. Violante. “Replication of Condensed Matter Heat Production,” in American Chemical
Society Low Energy Nuclear Reactions Sourcebook, Oxford University Press, August 2008.
