1. Opening Address


Ladies and Gentlemen, On behalf of the Organizing Committee, I would like to welcome all of you to the International Conference on Condensed Matter Nuclear Science, ICCF20. This is the 20th conference of the ICCF series, which started in 1990 in Salt Lake City in the U.S., and hence, continues 26 years. The ICCF conferences were held in Japan three times already so far: ICCF3 in Nagoya, ICCF6 in Lake Toya, Hokkaido and ICCF12 in Yokohama. We are very happy to have ICCF20 here in Sendai, Eleven years after the last one in Japan.
In these 11 years, the study of the anomalous heat effect has been greatly enhanced. Based on my personal opinion, I can give two examples as follows. First: the introduction of a device in which deuterium gas with particular nm-scale palladium particles by Prof. Arata in Osaka University: There was no electrical form of input, and the associated measurements of excess heat were performed by monitoring the change in temperature and gas pressure. Second: the revival of the nickel–hydrogen system by using nano-sized Ni particles with hydrogen gas and performing at higher temperature regions: I would say this is triggered by Rossi, although the evaluation of his device is quite uncertain now.
The study of anomalous heat generation, such as represented by these, has been making steady progress. Now, it has become very important to specify the material as well as to investigate its physical properties under a variety of experimental conditions. This may be a necessary step toward practical use, although it will take much more time, man-power, and money.

On the other hand, evidence linking the anomalous heat generation and the nuclear reaction is still sparse. First of all, detection of nuclear radiation is impossible if it is a special reaction process in which the reaction product is always in its ground state, as it would be with two deuterons only going to the 4He ground state. However, one can expect nuclear radiation, i.e., gamma-rays, beta-rays associated with a decay of a radioactive nucleus when it is created as a result of the nuclear reaction. Other radiation including X-rays, light, electric waves, etc. are also expected since the system should deliver the whole energy. Much more effort toward detecting these types of radiation simultaneously with the heat generation are highly desirable, now, in order to overcome the present condition where we have mostly circumstantial evidence. In the present ICCF, these subjects are to be discussed more specifically based on the newest experimental results. In addition, many experimental ideas, trials and data related to the study of CMNS are also to be discussed as well as a large variety of theoretical studies including interesting unconventional ideas.
I do believe that extensive discussions in this conference may serve to deepen the basic understanding of CMNS phenomena as well as to develop wide-ranging applications.

We have about 130 participants already registered in this conference. About two thirds of them are from over- seas: the participants are distributed over 17 countries. On this occasion of the international exchange, I would like you to know more about Masamune Date. As you see, his statue on horseback is an emblem of ICCF20. He was born in 1567 as a military commander of the period of wars before the Tokugawa era, and he created the foundation of Sendai City as a feudal load of the Tokugawa government. He was not a local person but his one eye had been open to the world. Once Masamune obtained the approval of the Tokugawa, he sent a diplo- matic mission to Spain and Rome in 1613: his retainer Tsunenaga Hasekura was the delegate. It was known as the Keicho era mission to Europe. Furthermore, Masamune had been well known as a person who excelled in both literary and military arts. Actually, Masamune was very good at Japanese poetry. His last poem is

I interpret this as follows: “I was just going the way I believed the best as if going with the clear moon light in my heart that illuminated this unpredictable warring world”. I am very pleased that the 20th ICCF is being held in this place, Sendai, where Masamune led a way of life which resembles an investigator’s thought.
Now, let us enjoy new findings and developments in this extremely interesting field of science and technology during these four and a half days, including a half-day sightseeing to Matsushima Bay which is famous for its scenic views.
Thank you very much.
Sincerely,
Dr. Jirohta Kasagi (Co-Chair of ICCF20 )