I. BACKGROUND

We started with the hypothesis that metal hydrides
stimulated at frequencies related to the lattice phonon
resonance would cause protons or deuterons to undergo
controlled electron capture. If this hypothesis is true then
less hydride material would be needed to produce excess
power. Also, this should lead to excess power (1) on
demand, (2) from light H2O electrolysis, and (3) from the
hydrides of Pd, Ni, or any matrix able to provide the
necessary confinement of hydrogen and obtain a
Hamiltonian value greater than 782KeV. Also, the excess
power effect would be enhanced at high temperatures and
pressures.

Brillouin's lattice stimulation reverses the natural
decay of neutrons to protons and Beta particles,
catalyzing this endothermic step. Constraining a proton
spatially in a lattice causes the lattice energy to be highly
uncertain. With the Hamiltonian of the system reaching
782KeV for a proton or 3MeV for a deuteron the system
may be capable of capturing an electron, forming an
ultra-cold neutron or di-neutron system. The almost
stationary ultra-cold neutron(s) occupies a position in the
metal lattice where another dissolved hydrogen is most
likely to tunnel in less than a nanosecond, forming a
deuteron / triton / quadrium by capturing the cold neutron
and releasing binding energy.

This would lead to helium through a Beta decay. The
expected half-life of the beta decay: if J_(4H)=$0−, 1−, 2−,
τ1/2 ≥$ 10 min; if J_(4H)=$ 0+, 1+, τ1/2 ≥$ 0.03$ sec[1].
Personal correspondence with Dr. D. R. Tilley confirmed
that the result of such a reaction would be β¯ decay to 4
He.

Early Pd/H2O electrolysis experiments used a wellmixed, open electrolysis cell in a controlled flowing air
enclosure. The temperature probes were verified to +/-
0.1°C at 70°C and +/- 0.3°C at 100°C. We
simultaneously ran live and blank (resistive heater) cells,
maintaining identical constant input power in both cells.
High voltage, bipolar, narrow pulses were sent through
the cathode and separately pulse-width modulated
(PWM) electrolysis through the cell (between the anode
and cathode).
Input power was measured using meters designed to
measure power high frequency (HF) PWM systems.
NaOH solutions were used for high conductivity.
Differential thermometry suggested excess power up to
42% and 9W (Fig. 4[2]).


II. EXPERIMENTAL METHODS

Fig. 1 Components of the Brillouin Wet Boiler.

Our recent test data were generated autonomously
through the use of a fully instrumented pressurized test
vessel that permits much greater control over experiments
than was possible using the “open container” test cells
from Phase One experiments.

A. Reactor Components:
The components of the most recent closed-cell Wet
Boiler are shown in Fig. 1.

Those components include:

• A 130bar pressure vessel with a band heater

• A 28AWG (.31mm) Ni 270 cathode

• Ni 270 wire mesh anode

• 0.5 liter of 0.15 to .5M NaOH solution

• Thermal transfer oil coolant loop with a heat
exchanger. MobilTherm 603

• Platinum resistive temperature detector’s (RTD’s)
measuring input and output coolant temperatures.

• Mass Flow meter in the coolant line.

• An catalytic recombiner , used for safety.

• Resistance heater for calorimetric calibration

B. Power Measurements:
We performed conservative measurement of the input
power into the reaction chamber and the control board. 

All inputs, including inductive and logic circuits losses,
are counted as power applied to the system

All power used for stimulation and control of the cell
is measured. The power delivered to the band heater is
provided by a Chroma 61602 programmable AC source.
A 100MHz Fluke 196C oscilloscope meter, operating in
"AC (rms) + DC" mode, was used to measure the all
input cell power applied to the primary control system.

Output power is calculated from the heat removed
from the inside of the test cell by pumping an organic
fluid (MobileTherm 603) through a heat exchanger
immersed in the electrolyte inside the cell. The electrolyte
is heated by the stimulation of the electrodes. An external
heat exchanger extracts heat from the circulating organic
fluid. The net heat in and out is carefully measured and
the difference is tabulated. The flow rate is measured by a
positive displacement flow sensor (Kytola 2950-2-AKTN). 100Ω platinum RTD’s are used to measure the
cooling fluid's inlet and outlet temperatures, placed just
before and just after the cooling loop, respectively. Room
temperature in the immediate environment of the test cell
is also measured using a 100Ω platinum RTD.

Heat also escapes from the test cell via conductive and
radiative loses. Heat flows out of the test cell through the
top of the test cell, its supporting brackets to a shelf, and
through its insulation. This is accounted for in the
software, following extensive calibrations of the cell
running with out stimulation pulses (Q).

The bias of the measurement scheme is to under-report
thermal output. The electrolysis recombination activity in
the headspace of the vessel increases the amount of the
conduction and radiative losses at the top of the cell as it
heats up and conducts more thermal energy through its
mechanical supports. These losses become less
significant at higher operation rates as the recombination
heat layer moves down to the point where the heat
exchange can begin to pick up more of that
recombination energy.

C. Cell Calibration and Operation:
This system recovers 98% of the heat input by the
control band heater alone. The circulating oil is not able
to remove all of the recombination energy in the test cell.
A significant amount of the recombination energy
escapes by conduction through the brackets that secure
the cell to the shelf that holds it in place.

The method chosen to measure these parasitic heat
losses is simple and accurate. The test cell has an electric
resistance heating unit called the band heater. The band
heater uses a known quantity of watts to heat the entire
system to a selected temperature: 70, 80 or 100 degrees
C. It takes 132 watts from the band heater to heat and
hold the vessel to 70 degrees C with the cooling oil
circulating in the cooling circuit. Measurements of the
circulating oil show that the oil continuously removes 90
watts at this set point. The difference (delta) is 42 watts
and this is the amount heat is “lost” from the vessel by
thermal conduction and radiated heat. At 80 degrees C,
the calculated parasitic loss figure is 45 watts and at 100
degrees C the parasitic loss is 47 watts.

Using this simple technique, at these three set points
the amount of heat leaves the system in excess of that
removed by the circulating oil is quantified to calibrate
the measurements. This information is used in the data
shown in the following slides. Table 1 shows the parasitic

TABLE I
TABLE OF CALIBRATION POWER LOSS TERMS

heat losses at 70, 80 and 100°C.

The cell/calorimeter is designed to operate at up to
200°C and up to 130bar. The pressurized cell is
controlled using LabView® software (National
Instruments, Austin, TX, USA) that continuously and
automatically collects information about energy flow in
and out of the test cell. All experimental data are
methodically and systematically archived and recorded to
disk. The thermal load due to radiative and conductive
losses, in addition to that collected by the heat exchanger,
are approximately 400 watts at a vessel temperature of
100°C but can achieve more than 2000 watts at 200°C.
The working fluid’s inlet temperature is maintained using
a re-circulating chiller (Neslab RTE111).

During operation we have applied up to 800 total
watts. The only input to the system is electric power and
the only output from the system is heat.

The AC stimulation consists of alternating high
voltage positive and negative pulses, approximately
100ns wide, of duty cycles up to 1% or repetition rates of
up to 100KHz


III. RESULTS

Representative results of experiments operated in our
pressurized cell/calorimeter are described below. Excess
power is defined as the number of watts generated in the
cell exceeding that supplied to the cell. The ratio of
output to input power is often plotted as percentage.
When the output, for example, is twice that of the input,
the amount of excess power is 100%.

The following experiments described herein were
designed to measure excess power produced using
proprietary electrical stimulation of nickel containing
dissolved hydrogen.

A. Experiment 1:
Experiment 1 yielded excess power of over 50% for
approximately 2 days. Fig. 2 shows the calorimetric
results and effect of stimulation frequency soon after 50% 
excess power was measured in the cell.

Fig. 2. Calorimetric results from experiment 1

The amount of excess power shown on the screen is
approximately 59 %. During this time period there was
107 watts in, 170 watts out, yielding 63 watts excess
power, with the cell temperature at 76°C and pressure of
84bar. Approximately 32 watts power was applied to the
catalyst and is included in the 107W total input power.


B. Experiment 2:
Fig. 3 plots the power and temperature recorded during

Fig. 3. Plot of power and temperature versus time for Experiment 1

a complete 66-hour Ni/H2O electrolysis experiment.
Excess power of over 50% was recorded for much of this
experiment. We repetitively swept Q repetition rate while
stepping up Q amplitude and then a third parameter
affecting Q shape to examine the effects and interplay
among them.

The excess heat produced during this run shown in
Figure 3 declined as additional power was applied. The
red line plots the percentage of excess power, blue the
sum of the electrical inputs, and green the temperature of
the test cell. The repetitive spikes in the data are due to
the cycling of Q repetition rate and the downward sloping
trend indicates the increase in power to a change in the
shape of the Q pulses. This slide indicates that the level
of the production of excess power does not rely
exclusively on input power since increasing input power
reduced absolute amount of excess power. The automated
test system now has the ability to automatically sequence
4 separate input variables. When the Q pulse shape
stepped out of an optimal operating point the red and blue
plots crossed.

C. Experiment 3:
Fig. 4 plots the calorimetric and temperature data for a
subsequent Ni/H2O electrolysis experiment.

Fig. 4. Calorimetric data for Experiment 3

In this experiment we examined the effect of changing
specific input parameters. This plot shows a thermal
output 50% greater than input for 14 hours. A gradual
increase in temperature tracks small incremental
increases in both the DC and AC currents. This continued
for 12 hours past the end of this plot as seen in Fig. 5.

Fig. 5 shows the sharp response of the system to input
power while everything else was held constant.

Fig. 5. Calorimetric results from Experiment 3 continued

A jump in excess heat from less than 55% to almost
70% was produced using the settings input during the
second half of the experiment on February 15th. Learning
from this data, we modified electric inputs to exceed
these results.

D. Experiment 4:
Fig. 6 plots the calorimetric and temperature data for
part of a Ni/H2O electrolysis experiment. While holding
total input power constant Q pulse shape was changed
which yielded excess power production in excess of 75%
for approximately 11 hours. After achieving a thermal
steady state, the system performed well for the duration
of the test. Subsequently a new set of input parameters
were utilized in this experiment, after which the excess
power peaked at approximately 85% and was above 80%
for more than seven hours.

Fig. 6. Calorimetric results from Experiment 4

E. Experiment 5:
Fig. 7 plots the calorimetric and temperature data for
part of a Ni/H2O electrolysis experiment. This was the
first time the excess power exceeded 100%., meaning the
“watts out” were twice the “watts in.” Certain electrical
inputs to the cell were changed deliberately in a
proprietary manner effecting Q frequency content.

Fig. 7. Calorimetric results from Experiment 5

This experiment is important because it shows both
our upward discovery trend and because it exceeded the
important 100% milestone. These set of representative
experiments showed that we have progressed well beyond
the results with the open-cell experiments described in
the Background section.

F. Experiment 6:
Experiment 6 shows the effect of changing the
repetition rate of the high voltage stimulation pulses.
Figure 8 plots the input and output powers,

Fig. 8 Effect of Repetition Rate on Excess Power

percent excess power, and the Q pulse repetition rate.
Output power is shown in blue, input power is shown in
green, and excess is shown in red as a percentage. The
proprietary repetition rate of the pulses is plotted without
scale in turquoise

For five days, excess power from the induced thermal
reaction in nickel hydride averaged approximately 20%
during times when the wave form at a given repetition
rate was applied to the nickel hydride. Total applied
power was above 450 watts. When the repetition rate
was reduced excess power fell significantly, even though
the input power rose. On seven different occasions when
total applied power to the system was above 450 watts,
and the repetition rate was reduced, excess power
dropped from approximately 20% to close essentially 0%.
Excess power returned quickly to approximately 20%
when the repetition rate was restored to its original value.

This plot demonstrates a cause and effect relationship
exists between the frequency of the applied waveform
pulses (Q) and the amount of excess power produced in
the test cell.


IV. CONCLUSIONS

We have demonstrated that the nickel-light-water
system is able to achieve more than 100% excess heat
production (“2X”). Recent data shows that excess heat
production was in the range of 110% for 2 hours.

We run over 150 experiments using two different
cell/calorimeter designs. Excess heat was always seen[3]
in experiments where Q pulses, which have been tuned to
the resonance of the hydride conductors (“core”), are
present. Using our open cell design it is now possible to
get excess heat on demand using light water and hydrided
nickel and palladium.

Pulsed power in the cathode is the preferred method to
raise the energy of the Brillouin zones confining
hydrogen nuclei in the metal lattice[1]. We postulate that
conversion of this energy to mass, results in the
production of cold to ultra-cold neutrons. The removal of
charge from the system by absorption of an electron by a
proton makes a current pulse the preferred source of
pulsed power because it provides electrons for capture.

In all cases, the application of a suitable Quantum
Compression waveform enables active hydrided materials
to produce excess power on demand without regard to the
grain structure. While it is common for “gross loading”
systems to work with some pieces of material and not
others from the same batch, We believe that the Quantum
Reactor technology caused every centimeter in all 15
meters of Pd wire to immediately produce excess heat
while exposed to properly pulsed currents in light water.
Quantum Reactor technology also allows for significant
modulation of the power out of the cell.

Leveraging the results of the open cell experiments,
the proprietary circuitry was attached to hydrided
conductors in high-pressure, high-temperature systems
for the sealed cell experiments2
.

The data taken from nickel-hydrogen system that was
stimulated by our proprietary electronic inputs show that
the thermal output is statistically significantly greater
than the electrical input. Measurable and repeatable
surplus thermal output is found in the nickel-hydrogen
system when all other inputs to the cells remain constant.
We have shown 100% excess energy and hope to achieve
200%, which would make the technology industrially
useful. We also believe that the moderately elevated
pressure and temperature environment of the pressurized
cell may increase the probability for proton-electron
captures, than the conditions at ambient temperature and
pressure, because the electrolyte can be heated to over the
boiling point of the electrolyte at atmospheric pressure. In
addition to elevated temperature and pressure, the
dimensions of the metal cathode inside the test cell, is
much larger than what was used in the “open container”,
first- round experiments.

We conclude that the reaction producing excess power
in the nickel hydride is related to and very dependent
upon the frequency of the Q pulses applied. We have
thus demonstrated that there is a repeatable and
measurable relationship between excess heat production
from the stimulated nickel hydride in the test cell and the
repetition rate of the applied electronic pulses. When the
repetition rate is changed from the optimum frequency,
excess power production ceases in the nickel hydride
lattice. When that repetition rate is restored, significant
excess power production resumes.


V. FUTURE WORK

We are looking closely at the experimental data from
Experiment 5 and will use it to attempt to break through
the next threshold 200% (“3X”) hopefully soon.

We have started to perform experiments in a third
cell/calorimeter design in collaboration with SRI
International that we believe will lead to more useful heat
by operating at higher temperatures. We feel that the first
commercial applications expected will be hydronic
heating systems that require grid power and produce
lower quality heat as well as higher quality heat systems
that will be used to re-power existing dirty generation
assets.

In addition to Pd and Ni, the Q-pulse reactor system
should work with other transition metals that confine
hydrogen nuclei sufficiently in a lattice to effect electron
capture events.


APPENDIX

A. Controlled Energy Capture Hypothesis:
p + ~782KeV + e- » n + νe
(using energy for ultra-cold neutrons)

p + n » d + 2.2MeV
(making ultra-cold deuterons and energy)

d + (up to 3MeV) + e- » 2n + νe
(using energy to make di-neutron system)

d + n » T + 6.3MeV
(making tritum and energy)

2n + d » 4H + (?MeV)
3n + p » 4H + (?MeV)
(making short lived 4H nuclei and energy.)

4H » 4He + β¯+ νe + (17.06 to 20.6)MeV
(making helium and lots of energy)


REFERENCES

[1] D.R. Tilley and H.R. Weller
Energy Levels of Light Nuclei A = 4
http://www.tunl.duke.edu/nucldata/ourpubs/04_1992.pdf
[2] R. Godes, “Brillouin Energy Corp. Phase One Data,”
http://brillouinenergy.com/Docs1/Phase_1-VerificationData.pdf.
[3] R. Godes, “Quantum Reactor Technology, Exciting New
Science, Potential Clean Energy Source,”
http://brillouinenergy.com/Docs1/BE25Tec.PPS.
[4] R. Godes, “Brillouin Phase II Data,”
http://brillouinenergy.com/Docs1/Brillouin_Second_Round_Dat
a.pdf. 