1. Introduction

Cold fusion (now widely referred to as low energy nuclear reactions, LENR) has the potential for immense benefit
for society as a cheap, clean, and virtually unlimited source of energy. It would also almost certainly be a highly
disruptive technology, at least in the short term, with adverse direct impacts on the existing energy infrastructure and
indirect effects on associated components of society. Fortunately, policymaking procedures are available to deal with
the “double-edged sword” of LENR.
Rational policies have served the public interest for centuries. Evidence-based Policymaking (EBP) is a rational
way to set – or reevaluate – policies for LENR research support to realize its energy benefits. Technology Assessment
(TA), a rational method of evaluating and mitigating adverse effects of new technologies on the various components
of society, may be readily applied to the LENR case. Policies for the beneﬁt of society are essential both for realizing
energy from LENR and for dealing proactively with its disruptive secondary impacts.


2. Background

The potential beneﬁts of LENR as a new source of energy were well understood when it was announced by Martin
Fleischmann and Stanley Pons in March 1989. Examples of LENR beneﬁts are:
• Virtually unlimited energy source.
• Low cost of materials.
• Environmentally secure (no emissions or efﬂuents).
• No harmful radiation or radioactive waste.
• Deployable in centralized or dispersed conﬁgurations.
• Energy source is available everywhere without transport or restriction.
• Reduction of energy-related environmental contamination by replacing fossil fuels.
• Decrease of carbon dioxide emissions and mitigation of global climate change.

Nagel has listed no fewer than 40 potential advantages and impacts of LENR development for thermal and electri-
cal power [1]. In addition to its promise as an energy source, LENR may have another beneﬁt, through elemental
transmutation, of dealing with the nuclear waste problem.

2.1. New technologies and society:
Governments worldwide adopt policies, laws, and regulations to protect and enhance the public interest [2,3], includ-
ing policies for developing new technologies. The beneﬁt to society from public support of research has long been
recognized. This support is particularly important in the early stages of technology development when research costs
may not be justiﬁed for private sector investment. Salient historical examples are the Manhattan Project, which brought
World War II to an end, and the US space program, where research has yielded many beneﬁts beyond the immediate
goals of the program. The public interest is well served by rational policies and methods like EBP.

Governments also protect the public interest by addressing the disruptive impacts of new technologies. These
impacts are both direct – on existing market solutions (e.g. current business) – and indirect – on sectors of society
closely associated with current infrastructure (e.g. workforces, communities, local governments). These direct and
indirect impacts are disruptive to both the private sector and elements of society [4].

Because the social costs of new technologies are normally not included in expenditures for their development, these
costs are viewed as “market externalities”. Public policies may thus be implemented to intervene in the free market
to mitigate the adverse secondary impacts and increase the overall beneﬁt of a new technology. A premier example
of such intervention is the suite of laws and regulations put in place to protect and clean up damages to the natural
environment by market-driven activities such as industries. Government intervention using methods like TA is often
necessary to protect the overall public interest.

The opportunity for government intervention for support of beneﬁcial R&D not qualifying for private sector invest-
ment and for mitigating adverse secondary impacts are the result of incomplete alignment of private sector interests
and the public welfare, which is referred to as “market failure” [5].

2.2. LENR policy status:
Notwithstanding its potential beneﬁts, LENR was rejected by mainstream science within a year or so after the 1989
announcement [6,7]. The processes and events that led to the rejection comprise an outstanding case for the ﬁeld
of sociology of science – the social processes by which science is “done” [8,9]. The boundary work of science –
determining what is accepted and what is rejected – is a major component of this sociology [10].

A principal reason that LENR continues to be rejected is the challenge it faces as a new phenomenon. Reliable
reproducibility remains elusive, and hypotheses to explain it are not yet converging to an adequate explanation. Exper-
imental observations cannot yet be interpreted in terms that are consistent with the current understanding of nuclear
physics.

Unfortunately, in some cases skeptical researchers maintained that LENR does not exist because they did not
observe it in their experiments; that is, not observing it means that a phenomenon is not legitimate. However, the
failure up to obtain success may actually be the result of not achieving the required experimental conditions [11].

Unlike most rejected scientiﬁc claims, LENR research did not die out. Instead, investigations have continued by
many researchers at locations around the world. Because of its pariah status [12,13], the ﬁeld has developed a social
science structure outside of mainstream science, including:
• Professional organizations. For example, International Society of Condensed Matter Nuclear Sciencea, and
Japan CF-Research Societyb.
• International conferences. For example, International Conferences on LENR (ICCFs)c
• Magazines and peer-reviewed professional journals. For example, Inﬁnite Energyd and Journal of Condensed
Matter Nuclear Sciencee
• Websites and blogsf. For example, Cold Fusion Now!g and New Energy Timesh.

Public policy for support of LENR generally followed the scientiﬁc rejection of the ﬁeld, and public resources became
very scarce. And, of course, no policies were pursued for dealing with its secondary impacts. Whether the rejection of
LENR was a “proper” instance in the sociology of science, or if the public interest has been served by negative research
support policies for the past 30 years, seems now to be almost a moot point. Particularly given the demonstrated vitality
of the ﬁeld and the progress that has occurred, the time has come to reconsider these negative policies. In consideration
of the public health beneﬁts of a locally available source of heat for cooking and water puriﬁcation, a strong case can
also be made for an ethical mandate to pursue of LENR.


3. Policies for Realizing Beneﬁts

A large gap has emerged between the promise of CF as an energy source and the policies toward its support for
realization of its beneﬁts. EBP is a rational and readily available approach for closing this gap [14].

3.1. Evidence-based policymaking for LENR:
EBP has its roots in evidence-based medicine [15,16], whose success led to the method being extended to other areas
such as business management [17] and public policymaking [18–20]. EBP can help to guide policy decisions when
(as is often the case) the best decision is uncertain. Policymakers often do not have a technical background and may
be challenged in making complicated science or technology decisions. An evidence-based way to address this issue is
to translate scientiﬁc evidence into levels of evidence (LOEs) that are used in the legal ﬁeld [21]. Policy responses can
then be developed based on the readily understood LOE and associated probabilities [22]:
• Preponderance of evidence (>50%).
• Clear and convincing evidence (70–90%).
• Beyond a reasonable doubt (>90%).

Assignment of the LOE in the case of LENR decision-making involves uncertainty, but the process of making the
assignment adds both clarity and rigor. For the LENR case, a preponderance of the evidence (POE) for LENR reality
may be asserted by the research credentials and experience of Dr. Fleischmann (Fellow of the Royal Society in Britain)
and Dr. Pons (chemistry department chairman), by the basic ﬁndings of their LENR experiments [23,24], and by the
early conﬁrmations by other researchers. Four examples of early experiments that conﬁrm excess heat are described
by Beaudette [25] – Richard Oriani (1990), Robert Huggins (1990), Melvin Miles (1990), and Michael McKubre
Clear and convincing evidence (CCE) is indicated by the hundreds of additional conﬁrming experiments by many
reputable researchers. For example, Storms conducted a review of reports of LENR for the period 1989 to 2004 and
found 319 claims of success based on three signatures of the phenomenon: excess heat (184), elemental transmutation
(80), and anomalous radiation (55) [26].

CCE is also supported by Bayesian network analysis of LENR experiments. Cravens and Letts [27] conducted a
review of 167 reports (1989–2007) and screened them to 122 “qualiﬁed reports” based on use of Fleischmann–Pons
type electrolytic cells and several other criteria. Johnson and Melich [28] performed a Bayesian network analysis on
eight of the qualiﬁed reports recommended by Cravens and Letts and found the likelihood ratio (that LENR is real)
over 10. Johnson and Melich then added four more reports from the Cravens and Letts list (total of 12 reports) and
found a likelihood ratio over 30.

Grimshaw, with the assistance of Johnson and Letts [29,30], conducted a Bayesian network analysis on the ﬁrst
10 experiments (six of which were considered successes) listed by Cravens and Letts. The analysis assumed “starting
probabilities” (pre-analysis estimated probability that LENR is real) ranging from 0.05 to 0.50. With a starting proba-
bility of 0.05, the probability of LENR reality increased to 0.59 after the ﬁrst 10 experiments. A starting probability of
0.50 (50/50) led to a probability of 0.96 after the 10 experiments. Such high likelihood ratios and probabilities clearly:
support an LOE at the level of CCE.

CCE is further indicated by the strong interest of large and well-known private sector companies [31,32] that are
currently funding the research. The development of prototype devices (e.g., Brillouin’s “Controlled Electron Capture
Reaction approachi and JET Energy’s NANOR and PHUSOR devicesj) that may be producing LENR energy also
supports a CCE level.

It seems likely that an LOE of beyond a reasonable doubt (BRD) will have to await publication of a convincing
hypothesis based on current (or extension of) understanding of nuclear physics or development of a readily reproducible
experiment. Alternatively, BRD may be established upon announcement of a working LENR device such as a water
heater or electric power generator.

What are the appropriate LENR policy responses to the levels of the evidence? The answer is again a matter of
opinion, but consideration of two relevant scenarios again increases clarity and rigor. The following are proposed as
rational responses for a conservative scenario.
• POE
Reinstate LENR and pursue its development rigorously along with other emerging energy
technologies.
• CCE
Accelerate LENR research in comparison to competing potential energy sources.
• BRD
Institute a crash program to achieve full understanding of LENR and realization of its beneﬁts, per-
haps at a level comparable to the Manhattan Project.

For a more liberal scenario and considering the immense potential beneﬁt (and ethical mandate) of LENR, a rational
policy response to POE would be to enhance its research in relation to other emerging technologies. A response to
CCE (as well as BRD) would be to undertake a crash program for LENR understanding and beneﬁts realization.

3.2. Implementation of policies for realization:
EBP-based strategies for LENR research must take into account several considerations:
• Complexity of the chemistry aspects of the phenomenon.
• Accommodation of nuclear physics for LENR observations.
• Interplay of the issues of reproducibility and explanation.
• Location, status, and capabilities of experienced researchers in the ﬁeld.
• Collection, interpretation, and utilization of experimental results to date.
• Research support in a centralized or dispersed manner.

The chemical conditions required for LENR constitute a large number of variables (“parameter space”) that contributes
to inadequate reproducibility of the phenomenon. The inability of current understanding of nuclear physics to account
for LENR observations is one of the principal reasons for its early rejection and continuing pariah status. Research
strategies must address the interrelated issues of explanation and reproducibility. A satisfactory explanation would
lead to improved experiments and enhanced reproducibility, and more reliable reproducibility would lead to greater
understanding and development of an adequate theory.

A great deal of information, particularly experimental results, has been generated by many LENR researchers over
the past 30 years and may provide a foundation for future research. Similarly, experience and insight gained on other
LENR aspects, including research methods and current competing hypotheses, could be a resource for developing
research plans and selecting investigators, locations, and facilities. Research strategies could involve dissemination of
resources to individual researchers and labs to address various facets of the problem. Alternatively, the research may
beneﬁt from a centralized approach (or two or three major locations) to help set priorities, share results, and enhance
communication.


4. Policies for Dealing with Disruptive Impacts

Proactive planning for dealing with disruptive technologies like LENR is essential for achieving their overall beneﬁt
to society.

4.1. Technology assessment for adverse secondary effects:
TA is a policy analysis approach for identifying and mitigating the adverse secondary impacts and unintended conse-
quences of beneﬁcial new technologies on the existing infrastructure and associated elements of society [33–35]. TA
was developed in about the same timeframe, generally in the 1970s and 1980s, as the major environmental laws and
T.W. Grimshaw / Journal of Condensed Matter Nuclear Science 32 (2020) 15–25
regulations that were instituted to prevent future pollution and clean up past contamination [36]. Although both are ex-
amples of government intervention in the free market to protect the public interest, the scopes of TA and environmental
protection are different. In TA, overall society rather than the natural environment is emphasized. And TA’s focus is
on the adverse impacts of innovative technologies rather than on the impacts of existing market-driven activities (such
as manufacturing) on the environment. The TA generally includes the following elements [37,38]:
• Development of the TA team and advisory group.
• Statement of the problem and description of the technology.
• Identiﬁcation of potential direct and indirect impacts.
• Delineation of affected entities.
• Determination of policy options for dealing with the impacts.
• Description of the policymaking infrastructure and agencies.
• Conclusions and policy recommendations.
• Implementation of selected policies.

The TA team and advisory group include both policy analysis professionals and knowledgeable persons from the
entities (private sector and government) most directly involved with or impacted by LENR deployment.

4.2. Implementation of LENR mitigation policies:
TA has been applied successfully for energy-related issues previously, for example for broad-based development of
energy resources [39] and for coal slurry pipelines [40], and it can be readily applied to the LENR case [41]. A speciﬁc
procedure based on the above steps is shown below.

4.2.1. Form project team and advisory group:
Because of the broad range of energy infrastructure and social system impacts, a multidisciplinary team will be required
for the TA. Participatory TA [42,43] will be emphasized, which will include both energy technology experts and
policy analysis professionals. The team will perform most of the impact analysis and development of mitigation
recommendations. The Advisory Group, including private sector and government representatives, will provide senior
guidance as the TA is performed.

4.2.2. Characterize LENR as disruptive technology:
The energy (and perhaps other) technologies that will emerge from LENR will be described in detail to enable assess-
ment of their direct and indirect impacts. Although considerable information is available, reasonable projections of the
types of devices, the rates of deployment, and success in energy market penetration will be made.

4.2.3. Reﬁne methodology for impact assessment and mitigative measures development:
TA has a well-developed basic process that can be applied to speciﬁc technologies and social contexts. This method-
ology will be reﬁned for the LENR case based on the detailed characterization of the preceding step. It will include
clear identiﬁcation of the public and private entities that will be directly or indirectly impacted.

4.2.4. Delineate direct impacts on energy infrastructure:
Impacts on the components of the full cycle of energy production, transportation, storage, and consumption will
be identiﬁed. Because LENR is likely to be deployed as both a centralized and dispersed energy source, different
components will be affected differently. The rate of deployment and market penetration in the energy sectors will be
included in the assessment. As the type, degree, and rate of direct impacts are delineated, mitigation alternatives will
be identiﬁed.

4.2.5. Assess indirect impact on social systems:
A large portion of society is closely tied to the current energy infrastructure. The social elements that will be impacted
can be determined from the components of the energy infrastructure identiﬁed above. Because social systems are likely
to have limited ability to discern and deal with emerging disruptive impacts, they may be particularly vulnerable.
Proactive planning is therefore particularly important to mitigate the social costs of LENR deployment. Mitigation
strategies will be prepared for the various entities having similar types of indirect impacts, such as communities,
non-energy businesses, workforces, governments, and ﬁnancial institutions.

4.2.6. Prepare integrated mitigation plan:
It is clear that the disruptive impacts of LENR on the energy infrastructure and social systems will be closely related.
The mitigative measures developed for the direct and indirect impacts will be reviewed, and a coordinated plan will be
prepared to take advantage of efﬁciencies and avoid measures having cross purposes. The agencies and other entities
available to implement mitigative actions will be identiﬁed in the plan.


5. Corollary Policy Considerations

Several factors must be taken into account for LENR policymaking to be effective:
• Opportunities for agencies to accomplish their energy-related missions by incorporating LENR in their scope.
• Differences in the agencies involved in supporting research and dealing with adverse impacts.
• Development of mitigation strategies in coordination with research support and LENR realization.
• Integration of planning and implementation among agencies both nationally and worldwide.
• Coordination of policies between the public and private sectors.
• Overcoming inertia of LENR rejection and continuing pariah status.

These factors will be addressed by exploring the opportunities and responsibilities of government agencies and the
private sector as well as coordination and integration of their policies.

5.1. Agency opportunities:
Policymaking for LENR development and impact mitigation present opportunities for national and international agen-
cies to realize their energy-related missions [44]. Given the importance of LENR realization and dealing with its
anticipated impacts, it may reasonably be argued that agencies have strong obligations toward LENR.

The types of agencies and their energy-related missions are quite different for LENR support and for mitigation
of adverse impacts. For example, in the U.S. the Departments of Energy and Defense are entities having energy
development interests. Examples of government entities having mandates for market intervention for the public interest
are the Environmental Protection Agency and the Department of Health and Human Services.

5.2. Role of the private sector:
Whereas governments have the twin role of LENR support and impact mitigation, the focus of the private sector is
mainly on development. Market force will be essential for realization of LENR beneﬁts, but it may be argued that
the market cannot yet be fully engaged. Because of its challenges in reproducibility and adequate explanation, LENR
continues to be a high risk for private sector investment. This risk is a principal argument for public support of research
in its current early development stage. If the early-stage research is publicly funded, the private sector may then step
in for applications and product development. At that point the power of market forces can be engaged to fully realize
LENR beneﬁts.

At the same time, it is noted that research is being funded by “angel investors” – not requiring a near-term reason-
able rate of return – and (as noted above) by large companies (especially energy consumers) having large resources and
a major stake in the success of LENR. A number of startups and other small companies are also pursuing LENR, par-
ticularly through empirical efforts to develop useful devices (rather than fundamental research for basic understanding
of the phenomenon). Efforts by the private sector to realize the beneﬁts of LENR will be enhanced by updating the
current negative stances for intellectual property protection (patents, trademarks) by government entities, particularly
in the US patent and Trade ofﬁce [45].

5.3. Policy integration:
Policymaking for dealing with the adverse secondary impacts of LENR energy must be coordinated with policies for
its research support and for realization [46]. Timing of mitigation planning should follow the rate of development and
anticipated market penetration. Such policy coordination will enhance efﬁciency and avoid plans having cross pur-
poses. Coordination is also essential among agencies having similar responsibilities – support or mitigation planning
– to meet their respective responsibilities (e.g. DOE and DOD, EPA and HHS). Policy coordination is also important
among agencies at the international and national level and between the public and private sectors.

5.4. Overcoming inertia of rejection:
Policymaking for LENR is strongly affected by its status as a pariah science.

In a sociology of science context of rationality, it may be asserted that the level of evidence of LENR must de-
termine future policies for LENR research and realization as outlined above. However, LENR has a large inertia of
negative perception. The importance of overcoming its pariah status cannot be overestimated. It is recognized that
despite the advantages of translating scientiﬁc evidence into levels of evidence (POE, CCE, BRD) described above,
the EBP approach may be constrained by the inertia of LENR’s negative perception and continuing pariah status.

If ultimately LENR becomes understood as a new – or extended – branch of nuclear physics (as well as a source
of energy), it will almost certainly be recognized as “revolutionary science”. Such revolutionary developments that
expand the boundaries of scientiﬁc knowledge are often initially rejected by mainstream science [47,48].

One scientist, a Nobel Laureate, disagrees with the way in which LENR was not accepted and has referred to the
continued rejection as “pathological disbelief” [49].

One possible way of lifting LENR out of rejection is to show that it is science rather that pseudoscience. This
approach amounts to asserting that an error occurred in the boundary work of science in the LENR case. An analysis
of criteria set forth by three prominent boundary workers (science skeptics) – Irving Langmuir [50], Carl Sagan [51],
and Michael Shermer [52,53] – has been performed for LENR [54]. The 27 overlapping criteria of the three skeptics
were phrased as questions, and each question was answered for LENR. It was concluded that the criteria were met and
that LENR is science, not pseudoscience.


6. Summary

LENR has tremendous potential beneﬁts as a new source of abundant, cheap, and clean energy. But as it becomes
widely deployed, it will also have major direct impacts on the energy infrastructure and indirect effects on associated
elements of society.

The ﬁeld was rejected as legitimate science within a year or so after it was announced by Fleischmann and Pons in
1989. Negative public policies for research support soon followed. But the ﬁeld did not die out after rejection. It has
continued to be pursued by researchers at many locations worldwide. Although much progress has been made in the
past 30 years, it still has issues of insufﬁcient reproducibility and inadequate understanding.

The time has come to reconsider negative policies toward LENR. Evidence-based policymaking is a rational ap-
proach for making decisions for research support in the public interest. Decisions based on the level of evidence will
enhance the prospect of realizing LENR beneﬁts. Because it will be a disruptive new technology, public policies are
also needed to mitigate LENR’s direct and indirect impacts. Technology assessment is a good method for dealing with
the secondary impacts of LENR.

Private-sector entities will help LENR beneﬁts to be realized through the impetus of market forces. Government
intervention in the free market for supporting new beneﬁcial technologies and for mitigating their disruptive impacts
is also essential for the public welfare. Many agencies have a mission to develop new sources of energy. Others have
a mandate to protect the public from adverse secondary impacts. Both types of agencies have the opportunity to help
accomplish their missions by including LENR.

Policies for impact mitigation must be coordinated with support policies for efﬁciency and to avoid cross purposes.
Similarly, integration of policies among agencies – and between the public and private sector – is essential for the
public interest. Regardless of whether policy is guided by the level of evidence, or the need for proactive planning for
impact mitigation, LENR will continue to have challenges in emerging from its long-standing rejection and continuing
pariah status.


References
D. Nagel, Potential advantages and impacts of LENR generators of thermal and electrical power and energy, Inﬁnite Energy
103 (2012) 11–17.
T. Birkland, An Introduction to the Policy Process – Theories, Concepts, and Models of Public Policy Making, M.E. Sharpe,
J. Anderson, Public Policymaking, 6th edn., Houghton Mifﬂin, Boston, 2006.
C. Christensen, The Innovator’s Dilemma: When New Technologies Cause Great Firms to Fail, Harvard Business School
Press, Boston,1997.
C. Winston, Government Failure Versus Market Failure, Brookings Institution Press, Washington, DC, 2006.
E. Mallove, Fire from Ice: Searching for the Truth Behind the Cold Fusion Furor, Wiley, Hoboken, NJ, 1991.
J. Huizenga, Cold Fusion: the Scientiﬁc Fiasco of the Century, University of Rochester Press, New Brunswick, NJ, 2002.
R. Merton, The Sociology of Science – Theoretical and Empirical Investigations, The University of Chicago Press, Chicago,
IL, 1968.
M. Fleischmann, 2000, Reﬂections on the sociology of science and social responsibility in science in relationship to cold
fusion, Accountability Res. 8(19) (2008) 19–54.
B. Simon, Undead Science: Science Studies and the Afterlife of Cold Fusion, Rutgers University Press, New Brunswick, NJ,
Altman and J. Bland, Absence of evidence is not evidence of absence, British Medical J. 311 (1995) 485.
D. Goodstein, Whatever happened to cold fusion? American Scholar 63,64(4) (1994) 527.
D. Goodstein, Whatever happened to cold fusion? Accountability Res. 8(19) (2008) 59.
T.W. Grimshaw / Journal of Condensed Matter Nuclear Science 32 (2020) 15–25
T. Grimshaw, Evidence-based public policy for support of cold fusion (LENR) development, 17th Int. Conf. on Cold Fusion
(ICCF-17), Poster (2012).
A. Cochrane, Effectiveness and Efﬁciency: Random Reﬂections on Health Sciences, Nufﬁeld Provincial Hospitals Trust,
London, 1972.
[16] D. Sackett, W. Rosenberg, J. Gray, R Haynes and W. Richardson, Evidence based medicine: what it is and what it isn’t,
British Medical J. (BMJ) 312(7023) (1996) 71–72.
W. Cascio, Evidence-based management and the marketplace for ideas, Academy Management J. 50 (2007) 1009–1012.
H. Davies, S. Nutley and P. Smith, What Works? Evidence-based Policy and Practice in Public Services, Bristol University
Press, Bristol, England, 2000.
I. Sanderson, Evaluation, policy learning and evidence-based policy making, Public Administration 89(1) (2002) 1–22.
R. Pawson, Evidence-based Policy – a Realist Perspective, Sage, London, 2006.
G. Garner, Black’s Law Dictionary, 8th edn., West Group, St Paul, MN, 2004.
L. Loevinger, Standards of proof in science and law, Jurimetrics J. Law, Sci. Technol. 32 (1992) 323–344.
M. Fleischmann and S. Pons, Electrochemically induced nuclear fusion of deuterium, J. Electroanal. Chem. 261,262 (1989)
M. Fleischmann, S. Pons, M. Anderson, L. Li and M. Hawkins, Calorimetry of the palladium–deuterium–heavy water
system, J. Electroanal. Chem. 287 (1990) 293–348.
C. Beaudette, Excess Heat: Why Cold Fusion Prevailed, 2nd Edn., Oak Grove Press, South Bristol, ME, 2002.
E. Storms, Science of Low Energy Nuclear Reaction: A Comprehensive Compilation of Evidence and Explanations about
Cold Fusion, World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 2007.
D. Cravens and D. Letts, The enabling criteria of electrochemical heat: beyond reasonable doubt, 14th Int. Conf. on Con-
densed Matter Nucl. Sci. (ICCF-14), Proceedings, 2008.
R. Johnson and M. Melich, Weight of evidence for the Fleischmann–Pons effect, 14th Int. Conf. on Condensed Matter Nucl.
Sci. (ICCF-14), Proceedings, 2008.
T. Grimshaw, R. Johnson and D. Letts, Level of evidence of cold fusion existence: bayseian network analysis of early
veriﬁcation attempts, Unpublished Manuscript, 2008.
T. Grimshaw, Evidence-based public policy toward cold fusion: rational choices for a potential alternative energy source.
Master of Public Affairs Professional, LBJ School of Public Affairs, The University of Texas at Austin, 2008.
T. Sandle, Essential science: Google is running LENR experiments, Digital Sci., July 8, 2019.
http://www.digitaljournal.com/tech-and-science/science/essential-science-google-is-running-cold-fusion-
experiments/article/553511.
K. Shubber, The Long-Shot Science That Attracted Brad Pitt and Neil Woodford: Promise of Abundant Nuclear Power
Propelled ‘LENR’ Company to $918m Valuation, Financial Times, Energy Sector, June 13, 2019,
https://www.ft.com/content/024cfc4a-8df6-11e9-a1c1-51bf8f989972.
D. O’Brien and D. Marchand, The Politics of Technology Assessment – Institutions, Processes, and Policy Disputes, Lexing-
ton Books, Lexington, MA, 1982.
R. Rich, Systems of analysis, technology assessment, and bureaucratic power, American Behavioral Scientist 22,23 (1979)
A. Lee and P. Bereano, Developing technology assessment methodology: some insights and experiences, Technol. Forecast-
ing Social Change 19 (1) (1981) 15–31.
Author Unknown, 1979, Closing the Environmental Decade - Assessment of the Seventies, CQ Researcher Archives, Novem-
ber, Available from http://library.cqpress.com/cqresearcher/ document.php?id= cqresrre1979111600.
G. Black, Technology Assessment – What Should it Be? George Washington University, Washington, DC, 1971.
[38] A. Porter, F. Rossini, S. Carpenter, A. Roper, R. Larson and J. Tiller, A Guidebook for Technology Assessment and
Impact Analysis, Vol. 4, Elsevier, New York, NY, 1980.
M. Devine and M. Ballard, Energy from the West: a Technology Assessment of Western Energy Resource Development,
University of Oklahoma Press, Norman, OK, 1981.
L. Johns et al., A Technology Assessment of Coal Slurry Pipelines, Ofﬁce of Technology Assessment, Washington, DC, 1978.
T. Grimshaw, Public policy planning for broad deployment of cold fusion (LENR) for energy production, 17th Int. Conf. on
T.W. Grimshaw / Journal of Condensed Matter Nuclear Science 32 (2020) 15–25
Cold Fusion (ICCF-17), Paper FrM1-1, 2012.
L. Hennen, Participatory technology assessment: a response to technical modernity? Sci. Public Policy 26(5) (1999) 303–
J. Durant, 1999, Participatory technology assessment and the democratic model of the public understanding of science, Sci.
Public Policy, 26(5) (1999) 313–319.
T. Grimshaw and D. Nagel, 2016, Responsibilities of U.S. government agencies for support of low energy nuclear reactions,
Presentation at the 20th Int. Conf. on LENR (ICCF-20).
T. Grimshaw and D. Nagel, 2016, Responsibilities of US government agencies for support of low energy nuclear reactions,
20th Int. Conf. on Cold Fusion (ICCF-20), Presentation and Paper, 2016.
T. Grimshaw, Integrated policymaking for realizing beneﬁts and mitigating impacts of LENR, 19th Int. Conf. on Cold Fusion
(ICCF-19), Presentation, 2015.
T. Kuhn, The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions, 2nd edn., Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, 1970.
W. Sharrock and R. Read, Kuhn: Philosopher of Scientiﬁc Revolutions, Blackwell, Cambridge, England, 2002.
B. Josephson, Pathological Disbelief, Lecture Given at the Nobel Laureates’ Meeting, June 30, Available at:
https://www.repository.cam.ac.uk/handle/1810/247336.
I. Langmiur (ed.), Pathological Science, Colloquium at The Knolls Research Laboratory, Niskayuna, NY, 1953.
C. Sagan, The Demon-Haunted World – Science as a Candle in the Dark, Random House, New York, NY, 1995.
M. Shermer, The Borderlands of Science – Where Sense Meets Nonsense, Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford, 2001.
M. Shermer, Baloney Detection – How to Draw Boundaries between Science and Pseudoscience, Part I, Scientiﬁc American
285(5) (2001).
E. Storms and T. Grimshaw, 2010, Judging the validity of the Fleischmann–Pons effect, J. Condensed Matter Nucl. Sci. 3(9)
(2010) 9–30.
