Nuclear Fusion in Condensed Matter


ABSTRACT

On the basis of the analysis of the energy loss
by a fast particle in a solid it is supposed that the
most probable energy range for the reactions of nuclear
fusion in condensed media is in the range of the
reduced energy of the interacting particles from Eo
to €2, (-(10-400)•1.6°10-19 J for D-D reactions).
The tritium generation rate has increased by
four orders of magnitude, while increasing the specific
power by a factor of four, and it has reached the
value of 109 atom•s- when the neutron-to-tritium
yield ratio is in the range from 10-7 to 10-9.

The possibility of performing the reactions of
nuclear fusion in condensed media between deuterium
and target atoms at low energies is shown on the basis
of the high-energy fi -radiation recording, the isotopic
targ


1. Introduction

Investigation of nuclear fusion in condensed
matter (NFCM) was performed according to the following
stages: from groundless hopes to systematic search
for some effects published before and to detection of
the conditions under which these effects take place.

We were the first to use deuterium ion bombardment
of different targets out of the powerful glow discharge
medium for systematic investigation of the NFCM effects
/1-3/.

The aim of this work is to determine the optimal
range of the NFCM energies when bombarding different the neutron-to-tritium yield ratio more exactly.

2. Model concepts

As a basis of the model of deuterons interaction
in a solid it is supposed that the fusion reaction
between them will be possible when two deuterons and
one atom of the target matrix hit one intersite cell.
In this case the reaction must be threshold (the energy
of displacement of the crystalline matrix atom is
(10-J0)•1.6•1Q-19 J for different materials) and the
collisions of the deuterons between each other and
the target atoms are studied in the energy range exceeding
the threshold one on the basis of the analysis
of the energy lost by fast particles in a solid. This
is possible at be having correlation between local
a(nnaulcylesairs) and integral (atoms) collisions. Such an is developed rather well for other fields of
physics, in particular, for studying solid surface
sputtering /4/.

possible energy intervals for nuclear fusion is
defined by the ratio of the elastic (nuclear) and nonelastic
(electronic) losses when accelerated particles
move in a solid.

The energy trans!er from the moving ion to the
target atoms as a result of the elastic collisions is
called nuclear deceleration and as a result o! the
nonelastic collisions - electronic deceleration. The
dimensionless values of the current coordinate Rand
energy E are used in the theory of ion path in amorphous
substances, developed by J.Lindhard, M.Scharff,
H.E.Schioett (LSS) /5/.where R - energy of the incident particle; M and M - masses of the incident particle and the targJt atom􀃰,
Frespectively; z1 and Z? - atomic numbers; aTF - Thomasermi
shielding distanoe; e - electron charge. 

where R - energy of the incident particle; M and M - masses of the incident particle and the targJt atom􀃰,
Frespectively; z1 and Z? - atomic numbers; aTF - Thomasermi
shielding distanoe; e - electron charge. where Sn(E) - nuclear decelerative ability; N - avera ge number of atoms per target volume unit: Se (E) -
electronic decelerative ability.

for all ion-target combinations can be found by
varying (de /dp ) n depending on £ (fig.1). The peak
of the nuclear loss curve corresponds to Et z 0.35. 

The values Ke for most of the deuterium ion -
target combinations is in the range 0.1-3.

For deuterium ions bombarding the condensed
deuterium the calculated energy of the maximum nuclear
losses corresponds to 30•1.6•10-19 J and the maximum
ratio of nuclear-to-electronic losses according to
P.Sigmund /4/ corresponds to the energy 7•1.6•10-19 J

llisions is near the nuclear loss maximum corresponding
to the energy (E; (see fig. 1) and the
energy, absorbed when the plrticles collide, decreases
considerably after the electronic losses exceed the
nuclear ones, that corresponds to the energy E,2 (see
fig. 1). In view of the above-mentioned we consider
that the most probable range of the NFCM energy is from
£0 up to £ 2, the calculated valuss of whieh for some Table one can see that depending on the used iontarget
combination of the interacting elements the
energy of the maximum nuclear losses can reach a few
hundreds of keV. According to the accepted model th•
nuclear interaction efficiency for moderate ion fluxes
when using accelerated ions, can be estimated by the
coefficient similar to the sputtering one. We called
it the nuclear interaction coefficient which is the
ratio of the amount of one of the nuclear reaction
products to the number of the ions incident on the
target made of the given material: 


3. Experimental procedure and results

procedure
of recording neutrons and tritium, which are brought about when bombarding different targets by
accelerated deuterium ions, are deseribed in /2/. The
discharge unit of the plant is designed according to
the diode circuit of the direct current in which the
specimen o! the cathode is bombarded by the deuterium
ions out o! the glow discharge plasma when the positive
potential is applied to the anode. The lamellar
specimens -130 mm in diameter and from 0.05 up to
1 mm thick, located on the cooled substrate, as well as
the cylindrical and rod ones having 5-20 mm in diameter
were studied. The deuterium containing protium
(up to 5% in atomic fractions) and tritium (up to
(5-7)•10-10% ) and having the pressure within 10-5•104Ie.
was used as a gas which generated plasma. The ion energy
changed within (20-104)•1.6•10-19 J both at the
expense of the supply voltage and at the expense of
changing the plasma generating gas pressure in􀃁the plant chamber. The current deneity was 25-5•10J A•rn2
and the speciment temperature was from JOO up to 2100K. 

determined by two methods at the experimental unit the
diagram of which is shown in fig.2. The h.eat flow
obtained as a result of the supposed nuclear fusion
reaction was determined by measuring the temperature
difference both in the measurement section at the temperatures
up to 1000K and along the both sides of the
weld at the temperatures higher than 1300K by the pyrometer
0MI>-54. The accuracy of such measurements didn't
exceed :t:50%.

Some results of measuring the tritium fluxes
and their neutron ratio, when irradiating a number of
elements by the accelerated deuterium ions out of the
glow discharge plasma, are given in Table 2. In this
table one can see ths.t J3-actj_vi ty of the plasmagenerating
gas considerably exceeds the initial one
after the gas exposure in the plant chamber under the
above-mentioned experimental conditions. The most
stable results on tritium generation were obtained
when bombarding the erbium and molybdenum specimens by
the accelerated deuterium ions and the maximum results
were obtained for the niobium5speQimens. The recorded
tritium fluxes were within 10 -10􀃂 atom•s-1• Tge unexpectedly
high rate of tritium generation (-10 atom•s-1)
was obtained when bombarding a material which doesn't
generate any hydrides under normal conditions, e.g.
when bombarding tungsten.

-3 up to 10-9 and mainly depends on the recorded
tritium fluxes. There!ore, one shouldn't consider
it final.

The tritium content in the near-sur!ace layer o! the specimens after the ion bombardment didn't correspond
to its content in gas. The analysis made in the
flow detector according to the procedure o! measuring
the electron spectrum depending on the energy (MSU
/6/) showed that after the deuterium ion bombardment  niobium layer was 107-108 atom•s-2 and in the nearsur!
ace tungsten layer (the tritium concentration in
gas phase was less by an order of magnitude) the tritium
concentration was within 5•1oj-5•1Q10 atom•cm-2
The ener􀃑y spectrum of the radiation from the niobium
surface (fig.3) is close to the curve of the tritium
J3-decay.

The nuclear interaction coefficient when gene
rating tritium (specific flux) versus the bombarding
deuteron energy is shown in fig. 4. The feature of th
dependence is a threshold availability in the range
70-150•1.6-10-19 J. When increasing the bombarding io
energy for the materials under investigation, the nuc
lear interaction coefficient has increased from 10-14

-10-13 atom•ion-1 up to 10-11 - 10-10 atom•ion-1. The
average value of the threshold energy is by an arder of
magnitude higher than the C.
0 estimation made according
to Sigmund and 2-5 times higher than the displacement
threshold ((10-30)•1.6•10-19 J). One failed to determine
explicit the energy corresponding to the maximum
values of Yn• It is supposed to be in the range (200-
400)•1.6•10-19 J. This energy is almost by an order of
magnitude higher than €'.t(30•1.6•10-19 J) for the deuterium
target, that may be caused by the metallic matrix
effect. The obtained, rather low values of the
energies of the maximum nuclear interaction can be
also connected with the features of the experimental
procedure, according to which the experiments with the
deuteron energies exceeding 500•1.6•10-19 J were performed
at lower pressures of the plasma-generating gas
and, therebefore, at lower deuterium concentrations in
a metalo

an be most effectively obtained in the range ot
the energies of the bombarding deuterium ions from
100•1.6•10-19 J up to 500•1.6•10-19J.

The availability of the radiation from the surface
is also verified by the specimen radiography
(fig.5). The radiogram with the total exposure of two
emulsion layers 0.02-0.03 mm thick, located on the both a-starting film; b-the emulsion layer adjacent to the

cpecimen is removed fig.5a),as well as with the exposure o! the same !ilm
but with the removed emulsion layer directly adjaoent
to the specimen (see fig.5b) is shown for yttrium.
One can see that the !ilm is pointwise exposed from
the outside, though the number of the points is less.
The outer emulsion layer was probably exposed at the
expense of availability of th& particles or radiation
having a higher penetration rather than at the expense
o:f the radiation caused by the tritium .ft-decay.

en surface, with the gas detector the thereshold
energy 160 keV and the efficiency 60%, allowed to record
the count level excess over the background up to
12% and to measure the time response of the decay
(Table 3) •

fl-radiation pulse count rate versus time for
yttrium after ion bombardment (E=110•1.6•10-1􀃷J,
I=O.J A, 7: =24 h) 

According to the estimation the j􀀃Y generation
rate is equal to 1-10-1 atom•s-1, that accounts for
10-6 of the tritium generation rate.

The results of the thermal balanee measurement
(fig.6) are compared with the calculated temperature
di!ference for the total power 1, for the supposedly
maximum power dissipating at the specimen o! the cathod
3 and accounting for 50% o:f the total one, for the minimun
power dissipating at the specimen of the cathode
4 and accounting for JO% of the total one and for the
experimentally measured one 2. In comparison with the
eetimations of the heat coming to the speoimen of the
cathode the maximum excess for the total applied power
70 W at the temperature - 600K was from 30% up to 100%
supposedly as a result of the nuclear fu􀃸ion reaction. 

The tungsten and niobium specimens were investigated
before and after the deuterium ion bombardment
at the device MS-720IM by the secindary ion mass-spectrometry
(SIMS) method. The ratios of the intensities of the mass peaks of the specimens under study in the
initial state and after the ion bombardment are given

power; 2 - experimental dependence; 3 - estimation
for the maximum power dissipated at the
cathode; 4 - estimation for the minimum power
dissipated at the anode

The peak of the 94th mass in the niobium-spectrum
has considerably increased after the deuterium ion bombardment.
In this case the presence of the 95th mass
(NbD) hasn' t been detected.
Thus, the emulsion exposure

the radio􀂼raphic experiments, availability of the
high-energy )􀂽-radiation as well as the isotopic composition
change registered by the SIMS mean that at
relatively low energies the following NFCM reactions
are possible not only bet ween the deuterium atoms but
also between the deuterium and target atoms:


4. Conclusion

lear interaction rate on the energy of the bombarding
deuterium ions has been detect ed in the NFCM
reactions. When increasing the ion energy by a fact or
of two (from 50•1.6•10-19 J up to 100·1.6·10-19 J), the
tritium generation rate has increased by 2-4 orders of
magnitude.

2. The new energy range ((100-500)•1.6·10-19J)
allowing to increase the reproducibility and reliability
of the experirr,ents was determined for the NFCM investigation.

interaction coefficients on the atomic number of the
target element isn't monot onic. The highest values of
the nuclear interaction coefficient were obtained for
niobium ( -10-10 atorn•ion-1) and for tungsten and hafnium
( -1 o-11 atom•ion-1).

-1 o-11 atom•ion-1).
4. The tritium fluxes reaching the value of
109 atom•s-1 and the neutron fluxes close to the background
ones don't allow yet to consider the neutronto-
tritium flux ratio at the level 10-j-10-7 to be the
final value.

eted unambiguously yet because of the low sensitivit
y and accuracy of the experiments. The subsequent
increase in the measurement accuracy and matching
between the generated heat and the other NFCM
products is required.

6. The data on radiography, high-energy )3-radiat
ion recording as well as on changing in the isotopic
composition of the target show that at relatively low
energies the NFCM react ions bet ween the deuterium and
target atoms, which are sim.ilar to the deuteriumdeuterium
react ions, are possible.


References

1. V.A.Romodanov, V.I.Savin, M.V.Shakhurin, V.T.Chernyavsky,
A.E.Pustovit.
Nuclear fusion in a solid. -
International Conference on Radiative Material
Science. Alushta, May 22-25, 1990. Poster report
1-100. Theses of the reports. Kharkov, 1990, 1-95,
part II, p. 80 (in Russian).
2. V.A.Romodanov, V.I.Savin, M.V.Shakhurin, V.T.Chernyavsky,
A.E.Pustovit. Nuclear fusion in a solid.Zhurnal
tekhnicheskoy fiziki, 1991, volume 61,
issue 5, p. 122-125 (in Russian).
3. V.A.Romodanov, V.I.Savin, Ya.B.Skuratnik, Yu.M.Timofeev.
Reactions of nuclear fusion in condensed matter.Voprosy
atomnoj nauki i tekhniki. Ser.: Radiation
damage physics and radiation technology. 1992,
Issue 1 (58), 2 (5-), p. 73-82. (in Russian).
4. Sputtering by Particle Bombardment I.
Physical sputtering of single-element solids. -
Edited by Behrisch.
Springer - Verlag.
Berlin-Heidelberg-New York, 1981.
5. D.Palmer. Ion implantation progress. -
In: Ion implantation into semiconductors and other
materials. Edited by V.S.Vavilov. Novosti fiziki
tvyordogo tela.
Issue 10. Moscow, Mir, 1980- 330 p. (in Russian).
6. R.N.Kuz'min, E.M.Sakharov, B.N.Shvilkin, A.P.Kuprin,
P.O.Revokatov.
Observation of fast neutrons and tritium during
electrolysis of heavy water. -
Institute for Nuclear Physics, Moscow State University.
Moscow, USSR. Preprint - 90 - 58%204, 1990, -
12 p.






