1. Introduction

Perhaps the most fundamental theoretical problem associated with the various ex-
perimental claims of anomalies in metal deuterides is how the deuterons manage
to come together at a suﬃciently high rate to produce observable reaction rates.
There was speculation in 1989 that screening eﬀects might be enhanced in metal
deuterides, and that this might account for the low-level neutron emission claimed
by Jones and colleagues at BYU.1 Over the years, papers have been published ar-
guing for, and against, enhanced screening eﬀects. Koonin and Nauenberg2 argued
that the screening should be similar to that of molecular D2. As screening eﬀects
are weak in the D2 molecule, the associated tunneling rate for the ground state is
more than 50 orders of magnitude too small to account for the low-level fusion rates
claimed in the initial BYU experiments.

The most popular line of argument in favor of enhanced screening eﬀects in 1989
proposed that an increase in the eﬀective electron mass was present in some metal
deuterides. An increase in the eﬀective mass reduces the screening length, according
to the early proposals, and increases the tunneling rate dramatically. A weakness
of the argument is that the eﬀective mass approximation describes electron and
hole dynamics over many sites in a periodic lattices, and is not applicable to the
screening problem.

There have appeared other discussions of screening between deuterons in metal
deuterides, but we will consider such works as largely being out of the scope of this
paper.
Our position is in general agreement with the arguments of Koonin and
Nauenberg, that one would not expect large deviations from the molecular prob-
lem. From our perspective, the highest tunneling probabilities are expected when
two deuterons occupy a single octahedral site in PdD. Although double site occu-
pancy may have a low associated probability, the tunneling rate is tens of orders
of magnitude larger than when deuterons are at diﬀerent sites. The two-deuteron
wavefunction associated with double occupancy is reasonably well approximated by
the molecular D2 wavefunction, and the modiﬁcations of the two-deuteron wave-
function by the surrounding lattice is not so great. Hence, we would expect the
molecular D2 problem to be very relevant for developing estimates for tunneling
rates for double occupancy, which we expect to dominate the tunneling rate over
all other processes under normal conditions.

We note that there has appeared very recently measurements of dd-fusion cross
sections at low energy which appear to show signiﬁcant enhancements3 (see also
[4] Earlier measurements in TiD produced reaction rates similar to that of D2,
while the new measurements show very large enhancements. We await experimental
conﬁrmation of the eﬀect. Our position is that if real, this eﬀect is most likely a recoil
eﬀect in which fast incident deuterons push deuterons at rest into tightly bound
electron orbitals, where very strong screening eﬀects would be expected. If this line
of argument is correct, then one would not expect the enhancements to extend to
the case of deuterons nearly at rest. The screening implied by these measurements
is suﬃciently large that the metal deuterides would be highly unstable against dd-
fusion if the same screening model applied naively to all deuterons (with thermal
energy) in the lattice.

In the absence of screening enhancements and exotic eﬀects that create fast
deuterons in the lattice, the only way that a modiﬁcation of the tunneling rate
can come about is if something changes on the nuclear scale. There have appeared
proposals for modiﬁcations of the tunneling rate due to the presence of nuclear
states that are nearly resonant with the molecular state (this idea has been pursued
in previous years by X. Z. Li and colleagues at Tsinghua University, and also by
Y. E. Kim and colleagues at Purdue). It is a relatively simple calculation to show
that in fact a nuclear state with appropriate properties could in fact produce a
signiﬁcant modiﬁcation in the tunneling problem, and lead to large enhancements
in the tunneling rate.
In spite of this attractive feature of this kind of model,
we note that the four nucleon system has been the focus of many theoretical and
experimental studies over many years, and it is known that there are no states
present that are suﬃciently close in energy and suﬃciently long-lived to make any
impact on the tunneling rate in the way proposed.

In what follows, we will examine the modiﬁcation in the tunneling rate due
to a resonant nuclear state using the simplest possible relevant model. Based on
the discussion above, there might seem to to be little motivation for pursuing such
a model, since we already know that there are no relevant four nucleon states to
which the model might be applied. However, we ﬁnd several reasons to pursue this
model: (1) It is useful to demonstrate cleanly that there is more to the problem of
tunneling between deuterons than simple Golden Rule transition rate physics as is
normally assumed; (2) it is possible to develop a two-level approximation for this
kind of problem, which allows us to study coherent and incoherent eﬀects on an
equal footing; and (3) this kind of model appears to have some relevance to the new
phonon-coupled SU(N) models that we have proposed for the anomalies in metal
deuterides. The results that we present lead one to conclude that resonant tunneling
models for the four nucleon system are not relevant to the problem of anomalies in
metal deuterides. However, the notion of tunneling as a coherent process that is
part of something larger going on in the lattice is in our view extremely important.


2. Piecewise Constant Potential Model

We have over the years become convinced of the utility of simple models that
embody the relevant physical principles as a way of developing understanding and
intuition about complex phenomena. Consequently, to study resonant tunneling, we
propose the simplest of piecewise constant potentials that has two wells separated
by a potential barrier. We adopt the radial (l = 0) Hamiltonian
where

We see an attractive nuclear potential for relative separation less than a nuclear
radius Rn, a zero potential between an atomic radius Ra and an outer radius R,
and a barrier of height V0 that separates the two wells. An advantage of developing
a simple model such as this one is that it is relatively easy to solve. We focus ﬁrst
on developing eigenfunctions and eigenvalues of the time-independent Schr¨odinger
equation
Solutions are constructed using

2.1. Limit of Perfect Isolation:
If the wells are isolated from one another, then things simplify further. The energies
of each well in isolation can be determined from matching the appropriate point and
slope of the assumed solutions at Rn and at Ra. We obtain the constraints
We note that kn, ka and α are functions of the energy eigenvalue E that satisfy
We assume that the energy eigenvalues of the wells in isolation are En and Ea.

2.2. Coupled Wells:
Now we consider what happens when the wells are coupled. The energy eigenvalue
in this case satisﬁes
Although this constraint may appear to be composed of lots of factors that have to
be sorted out, upon further inspection, one sees that it has a speciﬁc form that will
be useful to us. We see terms that correspond to the individual energy eigenvalue
equations in isolation that appear on both sides. We can collect these and write
If the coupling between the wells is weak (as we assume), then the energies will be
close to the unperturbed energies of the wells in isolation. Hence
We are therefore able to develop a simpler approximate version of the eigenvalue
equation which is of the form
This is interesting because it is of the same form as the eigenvalue equation for a
two-level system, as long as the terms on the right hand side are presumed to be
energy independent in the vicinity of the resonance. The static two-level system
eigenvalue equation can be written in the form
We identify the Gamow tunneling factor with the exponential on the RHS of equa-
tion (11)
There is nothing particularly special in this regard about the piecewise constant
potential that we have selected for this discussion in this regard. Other potentials
which might be proposed for this kind of problem, including Coulomb and more
realistic nuclear potential models, would produce a qualitatively similar relation for
the energy eigenvalue under conditions that both wells in isolation have states that
are nearly matched in energy.


3. Equivalent Two-Level System for the Coupled-Well Problem

The analysis of the previous section indicates that we can think of the coupling
between nearly degenerate states in a potential well using a two level model.5 A
Hamiltonian appropriate for the associated two-level model is
where φn is a basis state for the well at the nuclear scale, and where φa is a basis
state for the well at the atomic scale.

3.1. Rabi Oscillations:
The two-level model appears in a wide variety of applications, and its properties
are well known. We focus brieﬂy on the dynamical problem
To analyze this, one approach is to expand in terms of basis states
ψ = cn(t)|φn⟩ + ca(t)|φa⟩
This approach leads to the coupled equations
These equations are of course well known, and are readily solved.
Suppose we
assume that the system is initialized at t = 0 such that ca(0) = 1 and cn(0) = 0,
which corresponds to the two deuterons being initially in a molecular state. Then
we may compute the probability that the two deuterons are in the nuclear states at
some time later

3.2. Resonance:
On resonance (En = Ea), the probability oscillates between the two states sinu-
soidally with a frequency
The Rabi oscillation frequency associated with this coherent eﬀect is very fast as
compared to the decay rate associated with incoherent transitions
We see that Ω is proportional to e−G, while γ is proportional to e−2G. This is
important when each Gamow tunneling factor e−G is on the general order of 10−40.

3.3. Discussion:
Incoherent dd-fusion from molecular D2 is governed by Golden Rule decay dynamics,
and is very slow because the expression is proportional to e−2G. The Rabi oscillation
frequency that would be associated with a resonant nuclear state is much faster since
it is linear in the Gamow tunneling factor. This essential diﬀerence between coherent
and incoherent reaction rates has been noted many times since 1989. Moreover, the
low-level neutron emission rate reported by the BYU group in 1989 is roughly
consistent with the Rabi oscillation frequency for this problem. Since 1989, the
resonant tunneling model has been argued for by many authors as being relevant
to metal deuterides, and have proposed that the experimental results support the
existence of a resonant nuclear state.

In what follows, we would like to argue that in spite of the nice features of the
model, that the naive resonant tunneling model suﬀers from very severe problems
associated with maintaining coherence long enough for a Rabi oscillation to occur.


4. Relaxation Eﬀects

In many areas of applied physics where the two-level model is used, the predictive
capabilities of the model are often extended to include relaxation eﬀects in a simple
way.5 As applied to the present discussion, two deuterons in a molecular state may
begin tunneling as described by the formulas given above, but this tunneling may
be interrupted if the two deuterons separate and hop to other sites. We wish to
add such physics to our model, and understand what the resulting predictions of
the extended model are.

4.1. Bloch equations:
To proceed, some authors deﬁne real variables from quadratic combinations of the
expansion coeﬃcients. We deﬁne the Bloch variables
By taking time derivatives of the Bloch variables, it is straightforward to show that
the Bloch equations are obtained
where ℏω0 = Ea − En. These equations are equivalent to the evolution equations
for the amplitudes given in equations (17) and (18).

4.2. Bloch Equations with Relaxation:
Following the literature, we may extend the Bloch equations by adding relaxation
terms
where T1 and T2 are empirical relaxation times associated with populations and
with polarizations, respectively.

4.3. Solution:
The Bloch equations are linear and hence relatively straightforward to solve. The
solutions simplify considerably in the case where the relaxation times are equal, so
we focus on a model problem in which T1 = T2 = T. We consider one such solution
in the case where the two deuterons are initialized in |φa⟩ so that N(0) = 1, with
no initial polarization Q(0) = P (0) = 0. The solution in this case is
In writing these equations, we have used
and

4.4. Discussion:
One sees in the solution terms that are oscillatory with frequency Ω, and damping
terms that decay with the relaxation time T. If we consider the on-resonance case
where the energy levels are matched (ω0 = 0), then Rabi oscillations occur with a
frequency 2U
ℏ
while the damping occurs with a decay rate of 1
T . The relaxation
time T that one would associate with the dissociation of the molecular state in the
metal is not so well known, but one would expect times well below a second. The
Rabi oscillation frequency that would correspond to the fastest coherent tunneling
transition that might be expected is on the order of 1025 seconds. Consequently,
under these conditions one sees that all of the oscillations are completely damped
before they execute even a small fraction of a cycle.

The degree of resonance required for coherent processes to be seen in this model
is enormous. One case see this from the appearance of Lorentzian factors in the
expression, which could be rewritten as
If relaxation processes were somehow suppressed, to observe nearly full Rabi oscil-
lations would require
which is not practical. In the presence of relaxation processes, we require instead
to be resonant, which is a big improvement. The eﬀect under these conditions is
very much reduced.
To obtain a full cycle of oscillation requires that somehow
V e−G is commensurate. This would require a coupling matrix element very much
larger than what is plausible.

We conclude from these arguments that the resonant tunneling approach does
indeed exhibit an enormous increase in the tunneling rate as a coherent process
theoretically, but that the approach suﬀers from many problems. Among these are
the absence of resonant states in the four nucleon system, an extreme sensitivity to
any process that causes destruction of the coherence, and very stringent resonance
requirements.


5. Excitation Transfer Model

We are presently considering models for anomalies in metal deuterides in which
nuclear reactions are assumed to take place exchanging phonons with the lattice. In
this case, there is the possibility of second-order (as well as higher order) reactions in
which a reaction at one site is coupled with reactions at one (or more) other sites.
Progress on these models is discussed elsewhere in this conference proceedings.6
Here, we are interested in examining one aspect of the models that is relevant to
our general discussion of tunneling eﬀects in this paper.

5.1. Simpliﬁed Model:
We consider a simple model in which reactions at diﬀerent sites are coupled together.
We assume in this model that we have N1 deuteron pairs (with double occupation
of a site) which may fuse with phonon exchange to make 4He. The excitation energy
from the reactions is used to drive excitations elsewhere within the coherence domain
of a highly excited phonon.
For simplicity, we will assume that these reactions
involve transitions from N2 diﬀerent 4He nuclei to compact states.

In the SU(N) models, the coupling between the compact states, helium nuclei
and the highly excited phonon mode produce a very large number of states, some of
which are resonant with the initial molecular deuterium states. In the simple model
under discussion here, we will include only resonant states.
Excitation transfer
of the general kind under discussion here is present in the phonon-SU(N) models,
but the details of the coupling are not quite the same. Nevertheless, the simple
model under discussion here has associated dynamics that are similar to what the
phonon-SU(N) are presently believed to possess.

We consider then a model in which a population of molecular deuterons at one
set of sites react to make helium at those sites, coupled to a set of helium nuclei at
other sites which can be excited to make resonant states. Written using a notation
similar to that used above, the associated Hamiltonian is
In this expression the notation D2 refers to double site occupation within the metal
and “com” refers to two-deuteron compact states that are nearly resonant with the
D2 states.

5.2. Pseudostate Operator Formulation:
The model described above can be written more compactly in terms of pseudostate
operators
This Hamiltonian diﬀers from that of Equation (39) by an constant energy oﬀset,
which does not change the dynamics of observable quantities. The ˆΣz pseudostate
operators are deﬁned according to
The ˆΣ± pseudostate operators are deﬁned according to
The energy diﬀerence ∆E is
∆E = E[D2] − E[4He]
which is taken to be resonant with E[com] − E[4He].

5.3. Solution:
We can develop an approximate solution by forming a superposition of resonant
states within the model
where we used basis states formed of products of Dicke states |N, n⟩. Our notation
assumes N nuclei with n in the excited state. These states are consistent with
The expansion coeﬃcients cn(t) evolve according to

Figure 1.
Occupation probabilities as a function of time for the coherent transfer of excitation
from deuterium at N sites with double occupancy, to a set of N diﬀerent helium nuclei that excite
to resonant compact states. Time is normalized to units of [V e−G/ℏ]−1.

We illustrate results from a representative solution to this set of coupled equations
in Figure 1. In this calculation, we assume that N1 = N2 = 41, and that cN(0) = 1,
which corresponds to the situation in which all of the sites of the ﬁrst system are
occupied by deuteron pairs, and all the sites of the second system are initially helium
nuclei. The solution is shown as Pn(t) = |cn(t)|2.

We see that the population is initially localized in and around n = N, and ulti-
mately is transferred through intermediate states to states in the vicinity of n = 0.

The dynamics are nonlinear, since the coupling matrix elements are n-dependent
and largest when half of the population has been transferred. The associated dy-
namics could be considered to be a coherent version of Dicke superradiance.

5.4. Discussion:
The model under discussion here is intended to be particularly simple in order to
demonstrate cleanly eﬀects that are thought to be present in the more realistic
phonon-coupled SU(N) models presently under consideration. The dynamics of the
transfer of excitation from deuteron states of double occupancy to excited compact
states within the phonon-SU(N) model is thought to work similarly, and to have
similar dynamics. We see from Figure 2 that the dynamics occur on a timescale on
the order of

Figure 2.
Expectation value of reaction rate as a function of time for diﬀerent values of N. Time
is normalized to units of [V e−G/ℏ]−1 as in Figure 1. Rates are normalized to units of V e−G/ℏ.

and associated reaction rates on the order of
These expressions contain terms linear in the Gamow factor and accelerated by
a coherence factor. This kind of process is characterized by a “burst” eﬀect, in
which the rate is initially slow, speeds up dramatically, and then slows down again.
Such a burst eﬀect is pervasive in the experimental reports of anomalies in metal
deuterides.

5.5. Relaxation eﬀects:
We pointed out earlier in this paper that resonant tunneling between two deuterons,
as advocated by many authors, is not an attractive mechanism because it is com-
pletely washed out be relaxation eﬀects.
It might reasonably be asked whether
the excitation transfer models, such as the phonon-coupled SU(N) models or the
simple excitation transfer model discussed here, are similarly impacted. This is an
interesting question, the answer to which is not as yet completely understood.

However, there is an observation that may be helpful in this discussion. We
might expect a many-site excitation transfer eﬀect to be somewhat more robust since
if two deuterons at any one site drop out of the process, we expect that they will be
replaced by others at another site – because the average rate of double occupancy is
determined by statistical mechanics. Hence, under appropriate conditions, we would
expect there always to be a source of deuterons in sites with double occupation to
provide a source for excitation transfer.


6. Summary and Conclusions

From our previous investigations, we have come to the point of view that screening
processes in metal deuterides for deuterons with thermal energies do not change the
interaction between deuterons at close range signiﬁcantly from the molecular D2
interaction. The largest tunneling matrix element is developed when two deuterons
occupy a single site, in which case the relative wavefunction is reasonably close
locally to that of D2. Given this point of view, the possibilities of accounting for
the anomalies theoretically is greatly restricted.

The focus of our discussion in this paper is on the problem of resonant tunneling.
In our recent work on this problem, we have become interested in the application
of the two-level model to the resonant tunneling problem. The development of a
two-level model from a potential model that exhibits a resonant tunneling eﬀect
is straightforward, as we have illustrated from a construction using a piecewise
constant potential model. Although our particular construction is speciﬁc to the
model we chose, the development of a relevant two-level model to describe resonant
tunneling is completely general.

The advantage of using a two-level model to describe resonant tunneling is that
it is possible to include relaxation eﬀects in a simple way, using models that are
standard in other ﬁelds. From a consideration of relaxation eﬀects in the case of tun-
neling from molecular D2 states to conjectured resonant internal states, we conclude
that there is no possibility that resonant tunneling could account for the claimed
observations, since the coherence eﬀects that might be present due to coherence
eﬀects associated with resonant tunneling are completely washed out by relaxation
processes. This is a primary conclusion of this work.

It seemed reasonable to include a brief discussion of a resonant excitation transfer
model, since it is related to the resonant excitation transfer models under discussion
in this work, and since it is also related to the phonon coupled SU(N) models
that we are studying.
The premise of the model is that the excitation from a
collection of deuteron pairs is transferred by phonon coupling to a collection of
helium nuclei elsewhere, which is qualitatively similar to the situation in the phonon-
SU(N) models. The transfer of excitation from the deuteron pair to excitations
elsewhere are modeled and show both coherent and collective enhancements, which
is similar to what we expect from the more sophisticated models.

We are motivated by the results from the simple excitation transfer model to
work toward similar results in the case of the more sophisticated models, in the hope
of developing a general predictive capability for the anomalies in metal deuterides.


References

1. S. E. Jones, E. P. Palmer, J. B. Czirr, D. L. Decker, G. L. Jensen, J. M. Thorne, S.
F. Taylor, J. Rafelski, “Observation of Cold Nuclear Fusion in Condensed Matter,”
Nature 338 737-740 (1989).
2. S. E. Koonin and M. Nauenberg, “Cold Fusion in Isotopic Hydrogen Molecules,”
Nature 339, p. 690 (1989).
3. A. Kitamura, Y. Awa, T. Minari, N. Kubota, A. Taniike and Y. Furuyama, “D(d,p)t
reaction rate enhancement in a mixed layer of Au and Pd,” Proceedings of the Tenth
International Conference on Cold Fusion (this proceedings).
4. A. G. Lipson, G. H. Miley, A. S. Roussetski, and A. B. Karabut, “Strong enhancement
of dd-reaction accompanied by x-ray generation in a pulsed low voltage high-current
deuterium glow discharge with a Ti-cathode,” Proceedings of the Tenth International
Conference on Cold Fusion (this proceedings).
5. P. L. Hagelstein, S. D. Senturia, and T. P. Orlando, Introductory Applied Quantum
and Statistical Physics, John Wiley and Sons, NY, (2004).
6. P. L. Hagelstein, “Uniﬁed phonon-coupled SU(N) models for anomalies in metal deu-
terides,” Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on Cold Fusion (this pro-
ceedings).
