INTRODUCTION

Lack of reproducibility was a kind of original sin and a rich source of troubles, despair and skeptics
from the start of the cold fusion story. Now the situation is much improved, but the progress has
resulted mainly from trial and error experiments and not from cause-effect considerations, principles,
models or theories. This statement is valid even for the newly born light-water excess energy
experiments [1]. The most developed theories, e.g. the T.R.M. model of Bush [2] must be combined
with purely empirical descriptions of know-how and engineering data as those of Cravens [3] for
electrochemical cells. Scaramuzzi [4] for gas-metal systems, Mills [5] (the experimental part) and
Mallove [1] for light water experiments. An example of spectacular irreproducibility was obtained by
the scientists of the Bhabha Atomic Research Center [6,7]: "not only are the anomalous fusion
reactions found to take place in only a very few chips (obtained from the same piece of titanium) but
even in those chips, tritium production is restricted to a small number of selected localized 'hot spots'
only..."

Theory or analysis can do only a little for solving such practical problems like the choice of a
working electrode [3]. The situation reminds me of a saying of the famous Spanish painter Salvador
Dali: "The only difference between a madman and me is that I am not mad." A statement like, "a
good electrode is an electrode which is good" is not a tautology but a research report.
In my opinion, this "lack of reproducibility" is actually nothing else than an extremely high,
mimosaceous SENSITIVITY of the cold fusion phenomena, which can be triggered, delayed,
perturbed or stopped by some hyperfine, immeasurably small causes such as sub-parts-per-billion level
impurities or "esoteric" metallurgical factors. This sensitivity is intrinsic to these phenomena and
for this reason it seems inappropriate to correlate cold fusion to some ordered features of the
systems like electron screening, crystal or lattice structure, even defects of these or to any other
easily controllable factor.

In the following, I intend to prove my belief that the experimental facts and ideas generated by the
scientists working in this emergent scientific field have attained such a "density" that a global vision
and a continuous logical network of certitudes can be created and these can be used to solve the
central puzzle of the field.


DEFINING COLD FUSION PHENOMENA

Cold fusion phenomena are extremely sensitive and much varied nuclear processes appear to take
place at localized areas on the surface of some metallic hydrides. The phenomena are generated and
stimulated by dynamic factors. Due to their common topology which is not sufficiently controlled at
the present, all the phenomena having different mechanisms, appear as chaotic, non-linear, nonpredictable.

Cold fusion phenomena must be considered as sui-generis heterogeneous catalytic processes and the
modern concepts regarding active sites have to be applied in order to understand and direct the
reactions.


MORE ABOUT SENSITIVITY

* Monomolecular layers of heavy metals change the surface/interface properties of electrodes
considerably.

On this basis, Schlapbach et al [8] have developed an analytical method with sensitivity better than 1
part-per-trillion.

* A remnant soap film can inhibit the light water process, wherein the electropolishing of the nickel
cathodes is also a condition of success [1].

* Both the outer and inner impurities have to be considered; it has been shown that some impurities
(Rh, Ag) are migrating toward the surface of the palladium electrodes [9].

* The usual construction materials of the electrochemical cells - i.e. glass and platinum - seem to be
good reservoirs of impurities when exposed to long term corrosion. Perhaps it is not accidental that
one of the best cells, that of Takahashi [10] is made of polyacrylate plastic.


THE VARIETY OF COLD FUSION PHENOMENA

The data presented in the two excellent, complementary surveys published in 1991 [7, 11] is
impressive. More information was published later on light water excess heat reactions [5] considered
to be actually alkali-hydrogen fusion [12], multi-body fusion [10] as well as on a newly discovered
low energy intensity emission characteristic for palladium loaded with hydrogen or deuterium [13].

The similarities and differences between the processes carried out in the three main systems:
palladium, titanium and nickel (as well as their alloys) are not clear at the moment.


THE SURFACE IS THE LOCUS FOR THE COLD FUSION REACTIONS...

* Newly created surfaces can trigger nuclear reactions - see fractofusion and the co-deposition
procedure of Szpak [14].

* The light water excess heat process is clearly localized on the very surface of the nickel cathode,
impenetrable for the alkaline metal participant/component [5,12].

* Cold fusion in thin films works well [15].

* Implantation, even at high density seems to have a moderate efficiency.

* Tritium formed in the electrolytical experiments goes into the electrolyte [11], only a very small
fraction of helium remains in the electrode [11].


BUT ONLY IN RESTRICTED AREAS -- ACTIVE SITES!

* Neutrons and tritium are released in bursts; bursts are temporal just because they are local,
suggesting some sort of "cascade reaction or micronuclear explosion" [7].

* The point effect (the fusion reactions occur on the isolated tiny areas of the surface, due to the
directed moving deuteron flux) was postulated by Jiang et al [16].

* There are many data regarding nonuniform distribution of tritium in the electrodes.

* Hot spots on electrodes can be visualized by infrared techniques [3].

* Post-electrolysis cathodes present tiny spot defects suggesting cold fusion in grain boundaries. 


COLD FUSION IS STIMULATED BY DYNAMIC EFFECTS

* It is interesting to remark that different D/Pd ratios are necessary in order to trigger the emissions
of neutrons, tritium or heat. But in all these cases a long and rather unpredictable induction period is
required suggesting "a waiting time for removing an obstacle," not just "swelling of a network." Some
abundant emissions of neutrons result from a barrier-breaking process, see e.g. the work performed at
NTT-Tokyo [18] and our study [19].

* Many researchers consider pulsing current a critical factor.

* High temperature (i.e. high mobility) like in molten salt experiments [10] is advantageous for the
heat release.

* The same effect is obtained by high voltage discharges.

* The ever growing patent literature presents many dynamic methods for the enhancement of cold
fusion: different forms of excitation energy-mechanical (i.e. vibration), electrical, magnetic,
supersonic, optical irradiation, heating, pressure waves, etc.

* In spite of the expectations, very high pressure is not a stimulating factor [21].

* Cluster impact fusion - the nearest neighbor of cold fusion is obviously also based on dynamic
effects (and is a surface process too). [See new evidence, page 14.]


SURFACE MOBILITY OF METAL ATOMS IS KEY

Surface mobility of metal atoms is the key both for heterogeneous catalysis and for cold fusion.

One of the modern and successful Russian schools in the field of heterogeneous catalysis [22]
considers that surface dynamics is the determining factor for the existence of active centers. Motion
of both isolated atoms and clusters of noble metal atoms have to be considered. Chaotic motions of
surface atoms can be now directly observed. Surface dynamics and especially the rapid gas-surface
energy transfer are emphasized as important factors for catalysis in the review of Somorjai [23].
Actually, the study of catalytic surface phenomena in operating conditions is very difficult, given
that the most modern analytical methods must work under high vacuum conditions. The mobility of
hydrogen atoms on the surfaces of noble metals is very high, including quantum effects.

(Due to the limitation of my information sources, I am not current on latest publications regarding
surface dynamics of Pd, Ti and Ni hydrides - the considerations are usually restricted to the motion
of hydrogen atoms.)

In my opinion, the cold fusion phenomena are localized at active sites (similar to catalysis), and
characterized by intense surface dynamics. This is the unique possibility to justify their
hypersensitivity which needs a "sufficiently" chaotic factor. It is intuitive to imagine how a few
foreign atoms e.g. silicon or zinc are restraining the motion of the topmost layer of the metal atoms.
 A minimal quantity of organic matters adsorbed here when touching the electrode with a hand not
protected by a glove can have the same catastrophic effect.

In order to have a theory, you need reliable facts; emissions of neutrons, tritium, heat etc. are not
reliable, on the contrary, lack of reproducibility is reliable, it's rock-solid and reproducible! This
means: paradoxically, lack of reproducibility has an amazingly great informational value.
 When understood, generously unmasking itself, it gives us the solution how to destroy it... and to
understand what actually cold fusion is. The low energy emissions from palladium loaded with
hydrogen or deuterium, recently discovered by BARC scientists [13] cannot be unambiguously
correlated to chemical reactions, lattice phenomena or cold nuclear fusion. I suggest that this form
of radiation is caused by the peculiar surface dynamics of the Pd hydrides/deuterides and is a precursor
of cold fusion.


DISCUSSION

* A new concept regarding cold fusion has been presented, for the sake of brevity we shall name it
the SURFDYN concept (from surface dynamics).

* This concept is only a part of a theory. It has to be combined with reactions, mechanisms for two
and multi-body fusions, quantum and electric field effects etc. in order to solve the other puzzle of
the field: variety. This is not the task for one man.

* There have been elaborated many surface models of cold fusion in the past e.g. [24, 25]. These
can be now revived and adapted.

* SURFDYN is fusion on the lattice and not in the lattice. Theorists wouldn't like it. How is the
Coulomb barrier penetrated? Perhaps by dynamic quantum effects: cooperative motions of
deuterons, protons, metal atoms of the topmost layer and alkaline metal atoms (ions). What about
energy transfer? Or T/n production ratio? If the lattice isn't the locus for the nuclear reactions, is it
a competitor for hydrogen/deuterium? High D/Pd values have been considered as essential, this
concept remains valid but for an other reason -- to assure high surface mobility. In my opinion,
multi-body fusion is more easily conceivable on the surface than in the lattice. (Will Dr. Bush return
to the two-dimensional TRM?)

* What the nature, rise and dynamism of the active sites are, is an open question. A very rapid and
massive information influx from the field of science and technology of catalysis could be useful to
get the answer(s).

* It is possible that surface dynamics could be used to explain some special events like cells out of
control (explosion at SRI) or electrochemical cells producing heat without current (Wolf, Mizuno).

* The process used by our Japanese colleagues for producing "cold fusion quality" electrodes,
according to the technical folklore, can confirm or contradict the SURFDYN concept.

* More extended comparative studies of the surface dynamics of Pd, Ti, Ni, alloys vs. their behavior
and efficiency will contribute to the metamorphosis of "compelling evidences" in "certitudes."

I hope that the SURFDYN concept will prove to be no more but no less than the (now missing) link
between the theory and the practice of cold fusion.


REFERENCES

[1] E.F. Mallove: "Protocols for conducting light water excess energy experiments," Fusion Facts,
vol 3, no 8, Feb 1992, p 15.
[2] R.T. Bush: "Cold fusion: the transmission resonance model fits data on excess heat, predicts
optimal trigger points, and suggests nuclear reaction scenarios," Fusion Technology, vol 19, no 2, p
313.
[3] D.J. Cravens: "Trading views on what works (sometimes), Fusion Facts, vol 3, no 6, Dec 1991,
p 12.
[4] F. Scaramuzzi: "Survey of gas loading experiments," Conf Proc ACCF-2 Como, 1991, p 445.
[5] R Mills, S.P. Kneizys: "Excess heat production by electrolysis of an aqueous potassium carbonate
electrolyte and the implications for cold fusion," Fusion Technology, vol 20, no 1, Aug 1991, p 65.
[6] T.C. Kaushik, A.Shyam, M. Srinivasan, R.K. Rout, L.V. Kulkarni, M.S. Krishnan, S.K. Malhotra,
V.B. Naguenkar, "Preliminary report on direct measurement of tritium in liquid nitrogen treated
TiDX chips," Indian Journal of Technology, Dec 1990, p 667.
[7] M. Srinivasan: "Nuclear fusion in an atomic lattice: An update on the international status of cold
fusion research," Current Science, vol 60, no 7, April 10, 1991, p 417.
[8] L. Schlapbach: "Hydrogen and its isotopes in and on metals," Conf Proc ACCF-2 Como, 1991, p
409.
[9] D.R. Rolison, W.E. O'Grady: "Observation of elemental anomalies at the surface of palladium
after electrochemical loading of deuterium or hydrogen," Analytical Chemistry, Vol 63, #17, Sept 1,
1991, p 1697.
[10] A. Takahashi: "Nuclear products by D2O/Pd electrolysis and multi-body fusion," Proc ISEM -
Nagoya, Jan 1992, and Fusion Facts, vol 3, no 9, March 1992.
[11] E. Storms: "Review of experimental observations about cold fusion effect," Fusion Technology,
vol 20, no 4, Dec 1991, p 433.
[12] R.T. Bush: "A light water excess heat reaction suggests that 'Cold Fusion' is 'Alkali hydrogen
fusion,' Fusion Technology, to be published [Sept 1992].
[13] R.K. Rout, A. Shyam, M. Srinivasan, A. Bansal, "Copious low emissions from palladium loaded
with hydrogen or deuterium," Indian Journal of Technology, vol 29, Dec 1991, p 571.
[14] S. Szpak, P.A. Mosier-Bass, J.J. Smith, "Reliable procedure for the initiation of the
Fleischmann-Pons Effect," Conf Proc ACCF-2, Como, 1991, pg 239.
[15] R.D. Eagleton, R.T. Bush, "Calorimetric experiments supporting the transmission resonance
model for cold fusion," Fusion Technology, vol 20, no 2, Sept 1991, p 239.
[16] X.L. Jiang, N.Xu, L.J. Han: "Point effect and nonequalibrium conditions in electrolysis
experiments," AIP Conf Proc, Provo, 1991, p 228, and Chem Abstr, vol 115, no 191, p 165h.
[17] T. Matsumoto: "Microscopic observations of palladium used for cold fusion," Fusion
Technology, vol 19, May 1991, p 567.
[18] E. Yamaguchi, T. Nishioka: "Cold nuclear fusion induced by controlled out diffusion of
deuterons in palladium," Japanese J. Appl Physics, vol 29, no 4, April 1990, p L666.
[19] E. Palibroda, P. Glück: "Cold nuclear fusion in thin foils of palladium," J. Radioanal. Nucl.
Chem Lett., vol 154, no 2, May 1991, p 153.
[20] B.Y. Liaw, P.L. Tao, P. Turner, B.E. Liebert, "Elevated temperature heat production using
molten salt electrochemical techniques," Proc Spec Symp on Cold Fusion, World Hydrogen Energy
Conf 8, 1990.
[21] J.F. Silvera, F. Moshary: "Deuterated palladium at temperatures from 4.3 to 400k and pressures
to 105 kbar: Search for cold fusion," Physical Rev B, vol 42, no 14, Nov 1990, p 9143.
[22] V.M. Gryasnov, N.V. Orekhova: "Catalysis by noble metals: Dynamic features," Moscow,
Nauka 1989, p 224 (in Russian).
[23] G.A. Somoryai: "Modern concepts in surface science and heterogeneous catalyses," The Journal
of Physical Chemistry, vol 1990, no 94, p 1013.
[24] Ohta Tokio: "Is cold fusion possible? A proposal of the concept of 'surfusion'," J Surface Sci
Soc Japan, 1989, vol 10, no 11, p 896; Conf Ref Zhurn Fizika, FB 21, 1990.
[25] H. Hora, L. Cicchitelli, G.M. Miley, M. Ragheb, A. Scharmann, W. Schied, "Plasma and surface
tension model for explaining the surface effect of tritium generation at cold fusion," Il Nuovo
Cimento, vol 12 D, no 3, March 1990, p 393.