1. Introduction

Pions are responsible for all low-energy nuclear interac- tions1 and undoubtedly must be involved in the cold fusion interaction. Yet those in nuclear physics, even if they admit that cold fusion is a mysterious phenomenon, have been reluctant to look to the world of pionics for possible expla- nations. It must be admitted that it is the presence of pions within the nucleus that allows nucleonic species to bond to- gether and fuse with each other. This bonding feature ulti- mately results from the original Yukawa quantum mass postulates that still define pionic existence in nuclei.2 Pionic masses are about one-seventh that of either the proton or neutron and, thus, their interaction range is at least seven times that of their fellow nucleonic constituents based on mass alone.

This technical note briefly revives the single quantitative electromagnetic mass formula, dubbed "electropionic," uti- lizing pions as base mass units.3 About 85% of all the exper- imental masses of elementary particles and all the light nuclei (with the exception A = 6) of mass A < 16 can be comfort- ably calculated with the electropionic mass formula to within 1%. Section II discusses the location of several light nuclei generated by the electropionic mass spectra; several of these should be involved in cold fusion. Section III lists some pos- sible cold fusion scenarios emerging from electropionics, and Sec. IV concludes with some experimental suggestions and theoretical ramifications that might demarcate electropionics from other suggested cold fusion mechanisms.


2. Some Electropionic Particle and Nuclear States

The electropionic mass-energy spectra appear in Fig. 1. They are generated by the electropionic mass formula
where m(j,n) = M(pions) [1/n2 + IAtt3/3)] , 0) n = integral time quantization
j = either integral or half-integral (+ or —) spatial quantization 3
M(pions)= bifurcated experimental pionic masses.

Figures 2 and 3 display some geometric models showing al- lowable space-time configurations consistent with the mass equation given above. In effect, n corresponds to the num- ber of turns in the helix or toroidal model, and j is a de facto winding number with a positive j signifying one helicity sense and a negative j signifying the opposite. A \j | = 1 condition is required for spatial closure, e.g., turning the helix into a toroid. A more complete picture of the space-time dynamics used in the derivation of Eq. (1) is included in Ref. 3.

Equation (1) generates a mass spectrum m(j,n), 2 and Fig. 1 displays this spectrum for values <10 GeV/c with an additional constraint that \j | < n for convenience in pre- sentation. Experimental masses4 of elementary particles and nuclei that fit these tabular sites to within 1% are also in- cluded in Fig. 1.

As an example of the efficacy of Fig. 1, the proton/neu- tron doublet at 938.26 and 939.56 MeV/c2, respectively, can be sited at the ( j = 1, n = 3) site on the right of the table at a tabular mass value of 941.4 MeV/c2. For the sake of con- venience, this is noted as m(l,3)°, and each m(j,n) on the right side, generated by the uncharged pions ir°, is appropri- ately designated. The tabular masses on the left side of the chart are designated m(j>n)± since they were generated by the heavier charged pions ir+ and ir~. Certain transition masses are evident from a glance at Fig. 1, with a transition mass being defined as the difference between two m(j,n) massive states.

Electropionics theory does not differentiate between spin states and thus cannot distinguish between elementary particles, whether bosons or baryons, and nuclei. The deu- teron, the simplest nucleus in nature, has a spin of 1 and the D-meson particles are 0-spin mesons; each could be sited at either the (1,5)° or the (1.5,4)° site by the 1 °7o siting criterion on masses. We do know that the experimental deuteron is, in fact, the mixture of two angular momentum states, / = 0
( - 9 5 % ) and 1 — 2 ( - 5 % ) , in most conventional theoretical descriptions.5 Could it also be a mixture of two distinct spin states or two distinct mass states? Could a spin-0 deuteron also exist?

Note also that there are two possible sites for both the A = 3 nuclei, m( 1,8)° and atz( 1.5,5)*, respectively, and both are within 10 MeV/c2 (0.3%) of the experimental val- ues. Again the A = 4 masses can be assigned either to the m(- 2,5)° or the m (1.5,6)* sites. The m(- 2,5)° site at 3752 MeV/c2 fits the experimental 4H and 4Li values within
1 MeV/c2, while the m( 1.5,6)* site is 10 MeV/c2 heavier than the very stable alpha (4He) particle. These bifurcated mass sitings for A = 2, A = 3, and , 4 = 4 nuclei present complica- tions but also possibilities in fusion considerations.


3. Electropionic Fusions

Some likely fusions involving A = 1 and A = 2 nuclei are considered in electropionic m(j,n)
poses vis-a-vis tabular sites. First, we consider the traditional experimental possibilities that might be involved in cold fusion according to electropionics, as displayed in Fig. 1. Each nuclear mass is designated there by the appropriate (y,n) site for convenience.

P(l,3)° +
or
I H2(1.5,4)°
H2(l,5)°
He3(l,8)° + energy (2a) He3(1.5,5)± + energy (2b)
and
H2(l,5)° H2(l,5)° H3,He3(l,8)° N(l,3)° (3a)
or +or or +or
H2(1.5,4)° H2(1.5,4)°
H3,He3(1.5,5)± P(l,3)° (3b)
or
He4(—2,5)° or He4(1.5,6)± . (3c)

It is readily seen that Eqs. (2a) and (3b) conserve n values in Fig. 1, while Eq. (3c) conserves \j | for the first (—2,5)° case. If such multifaceted fusions exist even for a unique deuteron, many more can possibly exist for the bifurcated electropionic deuterons. First, we examine some possible cases conserving n values without considering baryon conservation.

With the reported absence of neutrons and negligible lev- els of tritium, both of which should be experimentally detect- able, it is likely that none of the reactions listed in Eqs. (2) and (3) are responsible for the thermal energies of the order of 10 MJ/ml reported by several cold fusion researchers.6 The only other alternative, should the deuterium isotopes be involved, is that some intermediary nuclear/particle reso- nance states, designated R* here, might be temporary anom- alous repositories of fused energy. Such intermediate states could have lifetimes of the order of days, which seems to be evident in the thermal yields of cold fusion cells where half- lives of the order of 8 to 10 days seem evident.7

We can now look at some possible anomalous nuclear states that might be present in the world of electropionics. We first look at some n conservation possibilities from Fig. 1 in the following scenarios:
H2(l,5)°, + H2(l,5)°-> R*( 1,10)° + energy . (4)
The excited resonance /?*(1,10) of rest mass 3194 MeV/c2 could then decay in the j = 1 row to a He3(l,8)° and a pair ofpionseachwithn= 1orasinglekaonwithn=2atthe expense of baryon conservation. Since n = 10 in the parent /?*, then any decay combination resulting in n — 10 in the products would be allowed. Hints of such a resonance at 3170 MeV/c2 have already appeared in the literature where it is now identified as E(3170) (Ref. 4).

Another possible scenario occurs as follows: H2(1.5,4)° + H2(1.5,4)°
->1T(1.5,6) at 3615 MeV/c2 + pions(l,l)± , (5)
which again conserves n values in Fig. 1 if two pions are al- lowed above.
The last possible fusion discussed here is the following:
H2(l,5)° + H2(1.5,4)°->/?*(l,9)°(3026 MeV/c2) + energy . (6)
This resonance could readily decay into a deuteron at (1,5)° and two kaons, or as many as four pions.

Several of these anomalous nuclear resonances described above by R* could serve as temporary repositories of energy and subsequently decay into conventional products such as kaons (n = 2), pions (n = 1), protons/neutrons (n = 3), deu- terons (n = 5,4), or even dibaryons (n = 6) while staying in the j = 1 row. Several of these can be ruled out by experimen- tal evidence such as lack of experimental neutrons and , 4 = 3 products.8 The energy budget could be such that the pene- trating length of the decay products of R* produces mean- free-paths less than the dimensions of the cells. However, neutrinos, electrons, and muons should eventually be evident in the ultimate decay products if this is the case; e.g., pions and kaons should eventually decay to leptons. Another pos- sibility is that the R* could live long enough to dispense its energy via phonons in the palladium9 lattice in a manner sim- ilar to that suggested by Schwinger. The advantage of such an /?* mechanism being responsible for cold fusion is that the loss of a baryon in the suggested decays gives energy yields —100 times those expected in traditional fusion reac- tions and thus a relatively low neutron or A = 3 count.
Baryon nonconservation is a mental cul-de-sac for many theorists. However, it must be remembered that no current theory predicts baryon conservation. The Weinberg-Salaam electroweak theory predicts conservation of the quantity B-L, where B is the baryon number and L is the lepton number.10

A likely remedy is that electron capture is involved in the actual fusion process. This would mean that a deuteron is somehow able to capture an electron (perhaps an inner-shell palladium electron), become uncharged, and exist for a brief time as an uncharged >4=2 nucleus as shown below:
electron + deuteron ->/?* + neutrino + photon .
This would make R* similar to the D°-meson, save for spin configuration, and it would have no Coulomb barrier as it approached a normally charged deuteron. The D° is 11 MeV/c2 lighter than the deuteron, while the charged D+ are just 6 MeV/c2 lighter. Even though the deuterium parti- cles have spin 0 compared with the deuteron's spin of 1, if we neglect the hidden symmetries of isospin and parity, the D-meson particles appear to be identical to spin-0 deuterons. Recalling that the deuteron is a mixture of two angular mo- mentum states, there is a likelihood that it could also be a mixture of spin states and that the spin-0 state is enhanced somehow (via phonons or internal transitions?) in the palla- dium lattice. The D-meson particles have some of the richest variety of decay schemes of all the elementary particles, 34 disparate decays for the D± and 27 for the D°. The paucity of particular decay products detected in cold fusion experi- ments could result from the plethora of possibilities.

Postulating that the deuteron is sometimes a D-meson or somehow decays into D-mesons totally neglects quark structure paradigms since the D-meson particles are allegedly charmed in quark content while the deuteron is not. How- ever, it must be admitted that quark structure models are ir- relevant to all fission or fusion considerations in any theoretical framework and to nuclear effects in general. What is more important is the fact that the D-meson family have decay lengths or interaction lengths of the order of 10-4 m, and thus their decay energies would be localized right at the palladium electrode surfaces; this seems to correspond to re- ported results of cold fusion.6 Of course, if R* = D°, then no fusion takes place at all, and the observed heat energies are the result of D° decays. Thus, each energy-producing re- action effectively produces 1800+ GeV/c2 at the expense of losing two baryons in the conventional nuclear picture.
If the deuteron is nothing more than a proton + neutron nuclear composite, then the considerations advanced here will be found wanting. The electropionic deuteron would appear to be a stable pionic process, and the pions within it are real and not virtual exchange particles. In particular, they give it mass-energy and possibly give it some additional spin states not heretofore explored as possibilities.


4. Conclusion

A case can be made for pions being responsible for nu- clear fusion processes, particularly at low energies of the type suspected in cold fusion. The pion is the lightest hadron in nature detected to date and thus has the longest de Broglie wavelength. It is the only experimentally detected nuclear constituent with sufficient range to cause fusion over the di- mensions necessary for cold fusion. It has such range by vir- tue of its mass, and it is a pionic mass relationship that distinguishes the views proposed in this paper from others vis- a-vis cold fusion.

However, the concepts advanced here are valid only if baryon conservation (inside nuclei) is sacrificed. Failure of baryon conservation as applied here does not mean that pro- tons may necessarily decay. There is mounting experimental evidence that protons do not decay.4 What electropionic nuclear and particle structures mean is that nuclei are not strictly made up of baryonic protons and neutrons. Rather they are coherent electropionic processes and their mass and energy levels spring mainly from the dynamics of real pions in space and time.

Pions, it seems, are capable of losing their identity in nu- clei at times and are able to maintain it at other times. After all, they are bosons, spin-0 ones at that, and in a spin sense they are more primitive than the alleged higher spin-1 gluons that theories of the Yang-Mills class seem to demand to ul- timately explain the strong forces.11

The nuclear and particle world may indeed be an elec- tropionic world. The mass calculations shown in Fig. 1 present all the strengths and weaknesses in such a world. If such a world exists ex tabula, there are many more massive states that have not, as yet, been experimentally confirmed. Masses of 3194, 3026, and 3515 MeV/c2 should be somehow detectable, if indeed any one of them is responsible for cold fusion. The price would be baryon conservation.

The D-meson mechanism proposed here rests on mass alone and sacrifices both baryon conservation and quark con- stituent pictures of elementary particles. However, it must be remembered that the cold fusion experimental results defy conventional nuclear physics, and all the attempts to retro- fit scattering lengths, cross sections, and Coulomb barriers in lattices at low energies seem to be wanting. Cold fusion de- mands a new physics, and electropionic considerations cer- tainly extend the theoretical possibilities that must be explored.


5. References

1. D. F. MEASDAY and G. A. MILLER, "Hopes and Realities for the Proton-Pion Reactions," Ann. Rev. Nucl. Part. Phys., 29, 121 (1979).
2. H. YUKAWA, "On the Interactions of Elementary Particles," Proc. Phys.-Math. Soc. Jpn., 17, 48 (1935).
3. J. KENNY , "An E / M Inertial Mass Theory Applied to mentary Particles,"//?/. J. Theoretical Phys., 13, 341 (1975
4. PARTICLE DATA GROUP, "Review of Particle Properties,"
Phys. Lett., B204, 1 (1988).
5. D. HALLIDAY, Introductory Nuclear Physics, Vol. II, p. 41,
John Wiley & Sons (1955).
6. M. FLEISCHMANN and S. PONS, "Electrochemically In- duced Nuclear Fusion of Deuterium," J. Electroanal. Chem., 261, 301 (1989); see also Erratum, J. Electroanal. Chem., 263, 187 (1989).
7. J. O'M. BOCKRIS, G. H. LIN, R. C. KAINTHLA, N. J. C. PACKHAM, and O. VELEV, "Does Tritium Form at Electrodes by Nuclear Reactions?," Proc. 1st Conf. Cold Fusion, Salt Lake City, Utah, May 23-25, 1990.
8. G. MILEY, "On Aspects of Nuclear Products," Proc. 1st Conf. Cold Fusion, Salt Lake City, Utah, May 23-25, 1990.
9. J. SCHWINGER, "Nuclear Energy in an Atomic Lattice," Proc. 1st Conf. Cold Fusion, Salt Lake City, Utah, May 23-25, 1900
10. S. WEINBERG, "A Model of Leptons," Phys. Rev. Lett., 19, 1264 (1967).
11. 11. R. MILLS, "Gauge Fields," Am. J. Phys. 57, 493 (1989).
