1. Introduction

Experiments over the past decade and a half have conﬁrmed the existence of an
excess heat eﬀect in Pons-Fleischmann experiments as well as in related experiments
involving metal deuterides. As the ﬁeld continues to evolve, there is interest in the
development of self-sustaining experiments, in which the excess power output is
used to produce electricity for powering the cell. The motivation for this is that
such an experiment may be required ﬁnally to convince the mainstream scientiﬁc
community, as well as the public in general and potential investors, that the basic
heat eﬀect is both real and useful.

This motivates a brief discussion of the basics of thermal to electric energy
conversion. The community of scientists and inventors working on the excess heat
eﬀect come from a wide range of backgrounds and disciplines, so that it seems to
be of interest to try to develop a tutorial-level manuscript on this problem to help
establish a common basis for discourse on the problem. For example, within the
ﬁeld there has been a general sense of optimism that as the power gains rise, a
self-sustaining device is not far oﬀ, which is true.
However, there has been less
agreement on precisely what power gain is needed to achieve that goal.

There are, of course, a limit as to how eﬃciently thermal energy can be converted
to electrical energy. Consequently, the place to begin our discussion is with the
Carnot limit, and the reasons for this limit. If we could convert thermal to electrical
energy with ideal eﬃciency as deﬁned by the Carnot limit, then we can deﬁne a
power gain requirement for self-sustaining excess heat generation. This power gain
is on the order of 4.7 for normal acqueous electrochemical experiments.

Commercially available thermal to electric conversion systems do not achieve
conversion eﬃciencies close to the Carnot limit.
Consequently, the power gain
required for practical self-sustaining operation are signiﬁcantly higher. We consider
brieﬂy as an example thermal to electric conversion based on thermoelectrics. These
arguments lead to the conclusion that we should focus on excess heat generation in
metal deuteride systems that operate at elevated temperature, since the conversion
eﬃciency improves signiﬁcantly.


2. The Carnot Limit

The maximum eﬃciency possible for thermal to electric conversion is given by the
Carnot limita
where Thot is the absolute temperature associated with the thermal source, and
Tcold is absolute temperature associated with the heat sink. For example, if we
consider a Pons-Fleischmann cell that produces excess heat near the boiling point
(100o C), and consider the heat sink to be at room temperature (20o C), then the
associated Carnot limit on eﬃciency is
The power gain required for self-suﬃcient operation in this (hypothetical) case
would be
Power gains as large as this have been discussed in connection with excess heat ex-
periments at ICCF10 and at previous conferences. Hence, self-sustaining operation
would ve possible in principle at present if only we were able to convert thermal
energy to electric energy at the Carnot limit.


3. Entropy

The Carnot limit derives from arguments about entropy conservation. The notion of
entropy was introduced originally in the development of classical thermodynamics as
an intrinsic property of thermodynamic systems.b The connection between entropy
and the microscopic states of a physical system was given in a famous paper of
Planck as2
S = kB lnΩ
where S is the entropy, kB is Boltzmann’s constant, and Ω is the number of accessi-
ble microstates of the physical system under consideration. Although this may seem
to be a bit like estimating how many angels can dance on the head of a pin, it is
possible to perform this computation for many simple microscopic physical systems
explicitly, either through analytic summations or integration, or using a computer
to estimate the number of accessible microstates.

The fundamental postulate of thermodynamics is that all accessible microstates
are equally probable in thermodynamic equilibrium. The occupation probability of
any single state is then 1/Ω. The determination of equilibrium conditions between
diﬀerent thermodynamical systems ultimately boils down to establishing conditions
under which this is true for all accessible microstates of the diﬀerent systems. If
energy can be exchanged between two systems, then equilibrium is established when
where the number of atoms or electrons, the volume and other parameters of each
system are held constant. If the system is not in thermal equilibrium and this were
not true, then the total entropy of both systems could increase by exchanging energy.

The requirement that all accessible microstates be equally probable is consistent
mathematically with the requirement that the two systems together on average be
in states where the total entropy is maximized. Since the temperature is deﬁned in
terms of the entropy through
we ﬁnd that the fundamental postulate leads to conditions where the total entropy
is maximized, which is equivalent to the temperatures of the two systems being the
same.


4. Carnot Limit and Entropy Conservation

The Carnot limit can be interpreted as being the condition under which the ﬂow of
entropy is conserved through a thermal to electric conversion system. We consider
the situation illustrated in Figure 1, in which heat ﬂows through an idealized single-
stage thermoelectric converter. The heat per unit area (heat ﬂux) entering into the
converter at the hot side is Qhot, and the heat ﬂux per unit area that leaves the
cold side is Qcold. The diﬀerence in the two heat ﬂows is assumed to be the power
per unit area delivered to the electrical load

Figure 1.
Schematic of thermal to electric conversion system. Heat ﬂows through the converter,
with Qhot entering on the hot side at temperature Thot, and Qcold at temperature Tcold leaves on
the cold side.

Qload = Qhot − Qcold
In terms of these variables, the conversion eﬃciency is
In association with heat ﬂow, there is an etropy ﬂow that is related to the heat
ﬂow according to
where s is the entropy per unit time and per unit area. The relation between entropy
ﬂow and heat ﬂow depends on the details of the quantum system, states and state
occupation, but for near-thermal distributions of electrons and holes this relation
holds. Phononic heat conduction also satisﬁes this relation between heat ﬂux and
entropy ﬂux.

It is possible for a thermoelectric converter to add to the entropy ﬂowing through
it. For example, if no thermal to electric conversion occurs, then the input heat ﬂow
at high temperature will match the heat ﬂow leaving at low temperature. The same
heat ﬂux at low temperature implies a higher entropy ﬂux than at high tempera-
ture, due to the relationship between entropy ﬂux and heat ﬂux of Equation (9).

Consequently, in this case the thermoelectric is increasing the entropy associated
with the heat ﬂow.

Let us suppose now that we have a hypothetical perfect thermoelectric that
converts as much heat to electricity as possible, subject to the requirement that the
entropy ﬂow cannot be reduced from the input value. In this case, the best that
the converter can do is to maintain a constant entropy ﬂux. In this case the heat
ﬂux is now a function of temperature in the thermoelectric
Q(T) = Ts
where s is assumed ﬁxed. Under these conditions, the conversion eﬃciency is
Hence, the Carnot limit in this example is a statement of entropy conservation. The
only way to improve on the Carnot limit from this perspective is to work with a
system in which the ratio of heat ﬂow to entropy ﬂow has a diﬀerent dependence
on absolute temperature.


5. Thermoelectric Current and Voltage Relations

The thermoelectric eﬀect, at least as far as is relevant to thermal to electric energy
conversion, shows up as an open-circuit voltage when a temperature gradient is
applied across a thermoelectric material. This basic eﬀect is accounted for in the
Onsager current relation3
where J is the current density, σ is the electrical conductivity, Σ is the thermopower,
and ϵF is the Fermi level. Under open-circuit condition (such that J = 0), a voltage
drop is induced in the presence of a small temperature diﬀerence (such that the
thermopower is constant), we can write this as
The induced voltage can be used to drive an electrical load.
The current and voltage relation for the thermoelectric in this model is linear.

The short circuit current density is given by the thermoelectric current density
where L is the thickness of the thermoelectric. The voltage as a function of current
density is given by
The power delivered to the load per unit area is


6. Eﬃciency of Conversion

We are interested in estimating the eﬃciency of the thermal to electric conversion
for this device. In the simplest relevant model, we assume that the heat ﬂow into
the device is determined by the thermal conductivity
In this case, the eﬃciency as a function of current density is
The maximum eﬃciency is obtained in this model when the current density is half
of the thermoelectric current density, which leads to
This can be rewritten in terms of the Carnot limit as
The goodness of the thermoelectric for energy conversion then is proportional
to the material parameters in the ratio
where Z is the Ioﬀe ﬁgure of merit. The product of this ﬁgure of merit and the
absolute temperature produces a dimensionless ﬁgure of merit
that is widely used to characterize thermoelectric materials.
Within the simple
model under consideration, the maximum eﬃciency in terms of the dimensionless
ﬁgure of merit is

Figure 2.
Optimum eﬃciency in terms of dimensionless ﬁgure of merit ZT .

This optimization is usually carried out with a better model for the heat ﬂow
into the hot side of the thermoelectric. The simple model that we have examined
leaves out two eﬀects that are import. There is a heat ﬂow associated with the
current, which increases the input power and reduces the eﬃciency. There is also
an incremental heat ﬂow out of the thermoelectric, that is often modeled as being
half of the total power dissipated in the thermoelectric. Together, this leads to an
improved estimate for the hot side heat ﬂux
If we recalculate the optimum eﬃciency using this model, we obtain the results
illustrated in Figure 2.


7. Real Thermoelectric Converters

From the previous section, we see that the attainable conversion eﬃciency of a ther-
moelectric depends on the material parameters. The goal of many research programs
over the past 40 years has been to ﬁnd thermoelectric materials with values of ther-
mopower, electrical and thermal conductivity such that the dimensionless ﬁgure of
merit ZT is maximized. The best thermoelectric materials presently available for
applications have a ﬁgure of merit in the range
ZT ∼ 2
A thermoelectric converter with a dimensionless ﬁgure of merit of 2 would convert
heat to electricity at roughly 28% of the Carnot limit.c The absolute conversion
eﬃciency for such a thermoelectric converter for a Pons-Fleischmann cell operating
near the boiling point is
η = 0.060
We see that the power gain required for self-sustaining operation is now
The eﬃciency of excess heat production in Pons-Fleischmann cells will need to im-
prove substantially in order to achieve self-sustaining operation with this technology.


8. Discussion

There are several general directions that one can proceed in light of the consider-
ations outlined above. On the one hand, it may be appropriate to begin focusing
greater eﬀort on excess heat conversion at higher temperature, since the Carnot limit
permits higher conversion eﬃciencies when the temperature diﬀerence is greater.
There are many diﬀerent approaches to this problem that have been discussed at
the ICCF conferences and described in the literature:
(1) Miles has proposed taking advantage of the increase in boiling point at
ultrahigh concentration of salts in the electrolyte as a route to acqueous
electrochemistry above 100o C
(2) Nonacqueous electrochemistry in solvents with elevated boiling points
(3) Electrochemistry in molten salts
(4) Plasma discharge loading at elevated temperatures, as has been pursued at
the Lutch Institute.
For example, if we assume that a high temperature discharge experiment produces
excess heat at 1000o C, then the associated Carnot eﬃciency is 70%, and one might
expect conversion to electricity at close to 20%.

There are ongoing research eﬀorts that have as a goal the development of new
converters that have a higher conversion eﬃciency.
New thermoelectric materi-
als are being developed that take advantage of layered materials to hinder ther-
mal conductivity, and reduced dimension to increase the thermopower. Solid-state
thermionic conversion is being explored. Thermoelectric semiconductors with emit-
ter layers and blocking layers have recently shown performance well beyond that
of bulk semiconductors. Research in the area of thermophotovoltaics continues to
show promise for achieving high conversion eﬃciency. Industrial electricity produc-
tion at present is done primarily with gas and steam turbine technology. Absolute
conversion eﬃciencies with these technologies are be in the range of 30%-40%, where
the higher numbers correspond to systems with very high operating temperatures
and regeneration.

Figure 3.
Carnot limit, and Carnot limit divided by 3, as a function of thermal source temperature
assuming Tcold = 300K. The gray bubbles indicate approximate projected operating regimes for
some of the diﬀerent approaches.

This discussion motivates us to consider approaches to the excess heat problem
that do not require electrical drives. Early observations of the “heat after death”
eﬀect by Pons and Fleischmann indicated that electrolysis is probably not a pre-
requisite for excess heat production. The Case cell is of interest in this discussion
in that it operates without electrolysis or internal currents, and hence only requires
heat to self-sustain. This is an important advantage in the eﬀort to develop self-
sustaining excess heat producing systems.


9. Summary and Conclusions

We have considered in this paper very basic issues associated with thermal to elec-
tric conversion, in a paper intended to be a tutorial on the topic. The Carnot limit
is fundamental to the problem, and we view the Carnot limit as a thermodynamic
limit of an ideal converter that does not generate entropy in association with the
conversion process. Practical thermal to electric conversion at present achieves con-
version eﬃciencies well below the Carnot limit in the case of small scale converters.

The poor conversion eﬃciency associated with the Pons-Fleischmann cell leads
one to the conclusion that the development of a self-sustaining system with this
approach will be very diﬃcult, requiring a power gain of more than 15. This re-
quirement is probably beyond the present capabilities of the most successful groups
working in the area.

The basic conclusion from this discussion is that other approaches need to be
focused on as candidates for self-sustaining power generation, and ultimately for
commercial applications. Excess power generation at elevated temperature should
be a fundamental goal, as energy conversion can be more eﬃcient in this case. Excess
power generation in systems that require either minimal or no electrical power input
are clearly going to play a dominant role in eﬀorts to make self-sustaining devices
due to the tremendous advantage of avoiding the conversion cycle completely. Such
systems that operate at elevated temperature will have clear advantages in the
conversion of thermal to electrical energy.


References

1. P. L. Hagelstein, S. D. Senturia, T. P. Orlando, Introductory Applied Quantum and
Statistical Mechanics, Wiley Interscience, Hoboken, NJ (2004).
2. M. Planck, “Distribution of Energy in the Natural Spectrum,” Deutsch. Phys. Gesell.
2 237 (1900); also published in Ann. Physik 2 553 (1901).
3. Johen E. Parrott, “Thermodynamic theory of transport processes in semiconductors,”
IEEE Transactions on Electronic Devices, 43 809 (1996).
