1. Introduction

The need for high deuterium loading in Pd in the Fleischmann-Pons experiment as a prerequisite for the
development of excess heat has been emphasized by McKubre and coworkers repeatedly over the years
[1-3]. We are interested in modeling the cathode loading in order to understand the associated physics,
and to simulate excess heat production.

The loading of deuterium in palladium can be understood simply enough in a broad sense in terms of
individual reactions that constitute the hydrogen/deuterium evolution reaction model. Deuterium is
brought to the surface through the Volmer reaction
D2O + M + e-  OD- + M + Dads (1)
Deuterium on the surface can recombine through the Tafel reaction to make D2 gas
Dads + Dads  D2 (2)
Adsorbed deuterium can move into the cathode to occupy more tightly bound sites associated with
absorbed deuterium
Dads  Dabs (3)
Other things can happen as well (as we will discuss below). However, these three basic reactions provide
a simple picture which allows for a quantitative description of the cathode loading at low current density
(in the Volmer-Tafel regime).

In this reduced picture, the electrochemical current is dominated at the Pd surface by the Volmer reaction.
When this occurs, one deuterium atom is deposited on the cathode surface as an adsorbed atom per charge
transferred. In this regime, we can load the cathode simply by applying a current.

As deuterium accumulates on the surface (and hence in the bulk), the deuterium chemical potential
increases, making D2 gas formation more likely. The loading is determined in the Volmer-Tafel regime
by matching the incoming deuterium from the Volmer reaction to the outgoing deuterium gas associated
with the Tafel reaction.

Although there are technical issues, this simple picture can account for important features of cathode
loading in the Fleischmann-Pons experiment at low current density. Unfortunately, at higher current
density the situation becomes more complicated. One can find publications in the literature which make
use of the hydrogen/deuterium evolution equations to describe the loading at higher current density [4,5].
Unfortunately, these models do not work particularly well when used systematically for different
experiments. For example, Zhang et al [5] used such a model to account for a decrease in the loading at
high current density observed in an experiment reported by Kunimatsu's group. In this model, the
Heyrovsky mechanism
D2O + Dads + M + e-  OD- + M + D2
accounted for this loss of loading. The Heyrovsky mechanism decreases the loading by one deuterium
per unit charge in the electrochemical current, in contrast to the Volmer mechanism that increases the
loading by one deuterium per unit charge. The problem is that the kinetics rate associated with the
Heyrovsky mechanism increases exponentially with loading. Hence, such a model would not predict a
loading significantly higher than the maximum loading for that experiment (D/Pd of about 0.85), where
there are now many reports of experiments where significantly higher loading is seen.


2.  Volmer reaction kinetics model 

We start with a model for the Volmer current density jV given by 
Here r is a roughness factor,  is the fraction of available surface sites with adsorbed deuterium, V is an 
asymmetry factor, f is e/kBT=F/RT, and  is the overpotential.  The notation d.b. denotes the counter term 
required for detailed balance.  Our notation is most closely related to that of Zhang et al [5]. 

There are two free model parameters here (the quantity r jV0/(1-0), and V).  The asymmetry factor V 
can be obtained from experiment, and we have used 0.49 as given by Green and Britz [6] for 0.1 M 
LiOD.  For simplicity, we have adopted r=2 from this work.  We are able to approximately match the data 
given in [6] with jV0 = 1.63x10-5 A/cm2 and 0=0.70.  This choice in our models approximately 
reproduces the overpotentials that are reported. 


3.  Tafel reaction model 

In the case of the Tafel reaction, we can begin with a model for the equivalent Tafel current density jT 
given by 
Here u is a Frumkin adsorption isotherm parameter [7], which takes into account the change in the 
chemical potential of the deuterium with loading.  In the beta phase, we have made use of the 
measurements of Chun and Ra [8], which leads to u = 20.0 at room temperature.  In the mixed phase 
region below a loading of about 0.60, the chemical potential does not change with loading, so that u=0 
would be appropriate.  It seems that there is one remaining free parameter, jT0. It is possible to obtain a 
reasonable fit to different data sets in the Volmer-Tafel regime, but only if we adopt a different value for 
jT0 for each experiment separately.  Individual values in this case can be different by two orders of 
magnitude. 

For the purposes of model development here, we will adopt the point of view that the reason for this 
variation is that there are internal surfaces where deuterium gas can evolve via the Tafel reaction, and that 
this gas can subsequently find its way to the outer surface.  This point of view is discussed by Storms [9]. 
To implement this, we will augment the Tafel reaction to read 
where a() is the ratio of the square of the internal surface area to the square of the outer geometrical 
surface area.  In anticipation of arguments to follow, we assume that the amount of internal surface area 
depends on the loading. 

While such a model seems to allow for a description of the effect, there is the problem that to determine 
jTO, we require experiments carried out on cathodes that we know have no internal leaks at low loading.  
In this respect we draw attention to a set of experiments reported by Green and Quickenden [10] where 
the cathode loading was found to increase up to 0.93 for cathodes that were vacuum annealed and then 
etched in acid.  Within the framework of the model, this pre-treatment produced a smaller value for the 
internal surface area.  In recent experiment at ENEA Frascati with thin foils (which initially are single 
crystals transverse to the surface), D/Pd loadings above 1.0 have been obtained.   

As a result, a low value of jT0 is probably appropriate.  A value which seems to be in the right regime in 
this regard is 2.0x10-8 A/cm2.  Tafel current densities as a function of loading for different assumed 
internal areas are shown in Figure 1.  According to this plot, the cathodes reported in Green and Britz 
have an internal area greater than the surface area by four orders of magnitude or so. 

Fig. 1 – Tafel equivalent current density jT versus loading for different values of a; the rightmost curve is for a=0. 


4.  Lithium model 

Experiments carried out in heavy water electrolytes with LiOD show that lithium enters the cathode 
[11,12] in significant amounts.  We assume that lithium is transported to the surface through the analog of 
the Volmer reaction in acid 
Li+ + M + e-  MLiads 
Adsorbed lithium probably comes off of the surface through a version of the lithium-water reaction  
2Liads + 2D2O  2LiOD + D2           
If we assume that in steady state the adsorbed lithium is determined from a balance between these 
reactions, then we obtain the following adsorption isotherm 
The measurements of the near-surface absorbed lithium concentrations of Yamazaki et al [11] 
can be fit well using this adsorption isotherm.  The overpotentials in [11] are determined 
relative to a reference hydrogen electrode (RHE), which seems to give rather different results 
than the method used by Green and Britz [6].  If we substitute these overpotentials matching 
currents, then we can fit the near-surface absorption data using Li = 0.53 and v = 19.4. 


5.  Lattice expansion effects 

As the cathode loads, the lattice constant increases.  One would expect this to have an impact on the 
internal surface area.  The loading curves of Green and Britz [6] show a reduction of loading at the higher 
current densities over what would be predicted from a simple Volmer-Tafel regime model (which would 
give the loading approximately proportional to the log of the current density).  Near 0.5 mA/cm2, the 
Volmer-Tafel kinetics matches the data well, but up at 50 mA/cm2 a pronounced reduction in loading 
from the Volmer-Tafel model can be seen.   

There is not agreement as to why the loading should decrease with increasing current density.  From the 
discussion above, the cathode loading is determined by a balance between incoming deuterium (which is 
provided by the electrochemical current via the Volmer reaction) and the outgoing deuterium (which 
leaves as molecular D2 via the Tafel reaction).  As the current initially increases, there is no reason to 
believe that the efficiency of producing adsorbed deuterium somehow decreases (which might be the case 
if reactions occurred via the Heyrovsky mechanism).  Measurements in this regime searching for 
evidence of the Heyrovsky mechanism showed that it is not present [6].  It seems unlikely that some new 
reaction mechanism kicks in that removes deuterium more efficiently than the Tafel mechanism. 

We will assume that the loading decreases because additional internal surfaces become available as the 
lattice expands with increased loading.  This point of view seems generally consistent with Storms [8], 
McKubre [10], and Zhang [13].  

Once we adopt this approach, then technical questions arise as to how to implement a model which works 
this way.  Intuitively, one would expect that the surfaces and channels that open as the lattice expands 
constitute physical changes in the lattice that might be expected to remain if the loading is subsequently 
reduced.  This would show up as hysteresis in the loading curve.  Although there is some hysteresis 
present in the loading curves, it seems that the effects are largely reversible.  As such, it seems reasonable 
to begin with a reversible model that can sensibly be parameterized.  To model the initial increase in the 
internal area, we have found reasonable agreement with a fit of the form 
The idea is that the internal Tafel leak rate at the beta-phase boundary (near D/Pd=0.60), when large, 
dominates the loading curves in the Volmer-Tafel regime.  The subsequent increase in the internal Tafel 
rate is then assumed to depend only on the loading, and not on the current density or overpotential.  The 
experimental curves seem to show a similar shape that has an offset in .  A more highly loaded cathode 
suffers a similar reduction in loading as compared to the Volmer-Tafel model as the loading increases.  
To capture this effect, we require a characteristic loading at which the increases start.  This is 
accomplished most naturally within the model by defining a characteristic loading a, which satisfies 
With this definition, the parameter w is fitted to be 6.0x105. This model seems to account well for the data 
of Green and Britz [6] up to 50 mA/cm2. 


5.  Effects at higher current density 

The model discussed above seems to be capable of extending the hydrogen/deuterium evolution reaction 
model to current densities up to about 50 mA/cm2.  To go higher in current density, we require further 
modifications of the model, for which there is even less consensus. 

To proceed, we focus on three relevant experimental observations.  The first is that the loading curves as 
a function of current density generally become flat with increasing current [9], and can show a decrease in 
loading at current densities approaching 1 A/cm2 [14].  A reversible decrease in the loading cannot be 
accounted for by the model above that we introduced to account for lattice expansion effects.  The second 
observation is that the Tafel plot (overpotential as a function of current density) can show a distinct 
change of slope at higher current density [15].  This effect can also be seen in the data of Ref. [14]. The 
third observation of interest here is that the catalytic activity of Pd and other catalysts is strongly 
dependent on the local surface morphology, so that atoms on edges and corners are more active [16].  
There is a growing literature on this issue, but we have so far not found papers yet which consider this 
effect specifically in the case of the Volmer reaction. 

We consider first the overpotential anomaly as reported by Bockris et al [15].  In the Bockris 
measurement, the (negative) overpotential is seen to increase with current density at a rate of 157 
mV/decade of current density between 20 A/cm2 and 5 mA/cm2.  At higher current density, the slope 
changes to 357 mV/decade.  In essence, more overpotential is required to maintain the electrochemical 
current density.  In the data of Akita et al [14], the same effect is observed, except that the slope increases 
near 100 mA/cm2. 

What physical process is capable of changing the slope on a Tafel plot?  Usually a change of slope signals 
the onset of a different reaction becoming important.  Such an interpretation doesn’t work here because 
the slope increases rather than decreases.  If the slope had decreased instead, then a plausible explanation 
is that the relative strength of a different reaction increased compared to the Volmer reaction, overtaking 
it at more negative overpotential where the current density is higher. 

For the slope to increase, we need instead some mechanism that makes it harder to get the current to flow 
as the current increases.  Perhaps the simplest approach is to assume that sites at which the Volmer 
reaction occur are getting blocked, so that more overpotential is needed to support a higher current per 
unit site at the remaining unblocked sites. 

We can show that this approach can work in principle through a simple example.  Assume that whatever 
blocks the active sites has an adsorption isotherm something like that of lithium given above in Equation 
(10).  In the limit that the blocking is sufficiently efficient that most of the sites are occupied, the number 
of unblocked sites is exponential in the overpotential 
The current density of the Volmer reaction in this limit would then acquire a different dependence on the 
overpotential 
In this limit, there will be an increased value for the change in overpotential per decade of current, as long 
as Li is greater than V.  The increased slope in this model would be matched to the difference in 
asymmetry parameters 
In our two-parameter fit of the Yamazaki data using the Green and Britz overpotential numbers, we 
obtained 0.53 for Li. But Li would need to be about 0.66 to be consistent with the measurements of 
Bockris et al given this interpretation.  An approximate fit to the Yamazaki data is possible if such a large 
value for Li is assumed. 

Now, the amount of lithium computed to be absorbed near the surface is in the few per cent range, so that 
we would not expect complete coverage.  However, suppose that the Volmer reaction occurs primarily at 
edge or corner sites, and suppose further that these sites are also targets for adsorbed lithium, then this 
mechanism could account for the Bockris and Akita observation.  If so, then the offset in current density 
where the slope changes could be related to the number of active Volmer sites. 

There remains the question of why the loading is reduced at high current density.  Given the picture 
above, one might conjecture that inhomogeneities are responsible for loss of loading at high current 
density.  The basic problem with the Heyrovsky mechanism in this model is that the Heyrovsky current 
density has such a strong dependence on the loading.  But if we assume that the loading is high close to a 
small number of active Volmer sites, then the local loading might be high, leading to the appearance of a 
Heyrovsky current density that is not connected with the average bulk loading. 


6.  Conclusions 

We have described issues involved in the development of a new electrochemical model to describe the 
loading of Pd cathodes in the Fleischmann-Pons experiment.  The basic hydrogen/deuterium evolution 
reaction kinetics model fails in this case, and we are working to develop a modified version of the model 
which works better.  To account for the data, we have to assume that D2 molecules are formed at internal 
surfaces inside that cathode.  The loss of this gas is responsible according to the new model for the low 
loading observed in most cathodes in early experimental work.  Lithium is adsorbed on the surface, and 
can be fit using an adsorption isotherm that results from a balance between Li+ deposition and the lithium 
water reaction.  The change in slope observed at high loading is attributed in the model to a blocking of a 
limited number of active Volmer sites by lithium (or perhaps by some other impurity that is adsorbed as a 
singly charged species).  The decrease in loading is conjectured to be caused by a modified Heyrovsky 
current density that depends on local high loading near active Volmer sites.  These modifications address 
the primary experimental issues, and it remains to develop connecting relations between the adsorbed and 
absorbed deuterium and lithium fractions. 


7.  References 

 [1]  M.C.H. McKubre, S. Crouch-Baker, A.M. Riley, S.I. Smedley, Proceedings of  ICCF3, Nagoya, 
1992, Nagoya, edited by H Ikegami, page 5 (Universal Academy Press, Tokyo, 1993). 
[2]  M.C.H. McKubre, S. Crouch-Baker, R.C. Rocha-Filho, S.I. Smedley, F.L. Tanzella, T.O. Passell, J. 
Santucci, J Electroanal. Chem. 368 55 (1994). 
[3] M.C.H. McKubre and F.L. Tanzella, Proceedings of ICCF12, Yokohama, edited by A Takahashi, 
K.-I. Ota, and Y Iwamura,  page 392 (World Scientific, Singapore, 2005) . 
[4] S. Szpak, C.J. Gabriel, J.J. Smith, and R.J. Nowak, J. Electroanalytical Chem. 309 273 (1991). 
[5] W.-S. Zhang, X.-W. Zhang, and H.-Q. Li, J. Electroanalytical Chem. 434 31 (1997). 
[6] T. Green and D. Britz, J. Electroanalytical Chem. 412 59  (1996). 
[7] E. Gileadi, Electrode kinetics for chemists, chemical engineers, and materials scientists, Wiley-VCH 
[8] J. H. Chun and K. H. Ra, J. Electrochem. Soc. 145 3794  (1998). 
[9] E. Storms, J. Alloys and Compounds 268 89 (1998). 
[10] T. A. Green and T. I. Quickenden, J. Electroanalytical Chem. 368 121 (1994). 
[11] O. Yamazaki, H. Yoshitake, N. Kamiya, K. Ota, J. Electroanalytical Chem. 390 127 (1995). 
[12] H. Uchida, M. Sato, W. Cui, T. Tabata, M. Kumagai, H. Takano, and T. Kondo, J. Alloys and 
Compounds 293-295 30 (1999). 
[13] W.-S. Zhang, private communication. 
[14] H. Akita, Y. Tsuchida, T. Nakata, A. Kubota, M. Kobayashi, Y. Yamamoto, N. Hasegawa, N. 
Hayakawa, and K. Kunimatsu, Proceedings of ICCF4, Lahaina, 1993, edited by T.O. Passell, page 
21-1 (EPRI, Palo Alto, 1994). 
[15] J.O’M. Bockris, D. Hodko, and Z. Minevski, Proceedings of ICCF2, Lake Como, 1991,edited by T. 
Bressani, E. Del Guidice, and G. Preparata, page 337 (Italian Physical Society, 1991).  
[16] R. Narayanan and M.A. El-Sayed, Nano Letters 4 1343 (2004). 
