UNUSUAL STRUCTURES ON THE MATERIAL SURFACES IRRADIATED BY LOW ENERGY IONS.

B. RODIONOV
Moscow Engineering & Physical Institute (State University), Kashirskoe shossse, 31, Moscow, 115407 Russia
115407 Russia 

I. SAVVATIMOVA
  
Federal State Unitarian Enterprise Scientific Research Institute “Luch”, 
Zheleznodorozhnaya, 24, Podolsk, Moscow region, 142116, Russia 
Some unusual structures on the surface of metals and films (various x-ray films and nuclear 
emulsions ) caused by exposure to bombardment by low-energy ions in glow discharge plasma, in 
electrolysis and other low-energy processes (when energy of particles doesn’t exceed several keV) 
have been found. The mechanism and model of the strange tracks formations and explanation of 
their structure change are suggested. 


1 Introduction 

For a number of years in various laboratories of the world physicists discover strange 
tracks (which we call traces, whereas the objects that cause them are termed as tracers) 
[1-5]. The traces, as a rule, are characterized by a microscopic width (usually about 10 
micrometers), but their length is presumably unlimited (mm and more). Sometimes the 
traces look like a repeated pattern, similar to the tread design of a motorcar tire or a 
necklace (Fig.4).  Sometimes the pattern forms a continuous line  or a group of parallel 
lines, differing from the standard tracks left by heavy charged particles in nuclear photo-
emulsions by their angularity or enormous length (up to cm). Occasional flaws of the 
samples containing traces (on the polished surface of metals or in photo-emulsions) do 
not explain the connected occurrence of the traces at the places of local energy 
generation: electrical discharges, particle accelerator targets, and the areas of natural 
disasters or technogenic ones, which are caused by the human activity).  This feature of 
the phenomenon in question may be used to predict or to avoid the technogenic disasters, 
for example, the search of traces or tracers can help in analyzing the causes of the 
Chernobyl Catastrophe.  


2.  Experimental results and discussion. 

We observed the unusual structures on the surfaces of metals after glow discharge 
exposure (Fig.1) and on the films (various X-ray films, nuclear emulsions and others), 
placed both on the inside and the outside of the glow discharge chamber (Fig.2). The 
similar tracks formations (with periodical repeating structure) were found on the nuclear 
emulsion films after the neutron generator exposure (Fig. 3). Such tracks structures as 
demonstrated in Fig.1-3 (regular structures, spirals, chains, chains of voids and others) 
need the comprehensible explanation from the viewpoint of material science and demand 
special physical interpretation. 
      However, the classical approach to the study of physical phenomena requires not only 
substantiation of the principal possibility of the process in question, but also its detailed 
description including illustrative examples. The latter may become possible on the basis 
of a model of filiform (threadlike, filament) matter, i.e. fluxes. Some components of the 
‘flux theory’ will be discussed below in application to the problem under discussion.  

Along with traces (in metals to the depth of 1-2 cm), changes in physical and 
chemical properties of underlying layers from the viewpoint of their composition and 
structure are observed (see Table for Fig 4). Under the surface of previously monolithic 
sample some micro-tunnels and “holes” appear (Fig. 1-4). On the surface of the samples 
examined before the exposure without any distinctive properties,  not only traces, but also 
some microscopic structures – films, hollow spheres and cylinders, threads, spirals, 
complex spherical and cylindrical formations looking like “cabbages” or “sausages”- 
were discovered after the exposure to low-energetic electrons, ions or ultrasound action 
(Fig.1-4). Sometimes these structures remind bacteria or a colony of bacteria, which may 
glow (fluoresce) in the dark. These objects move randomly and appear on the surface or 
“plunge” back into the depth of the previously monolithic material. This activity of “live” 
bacteria objects may continue for weeks after the energetic influence (after it has been 
finished) [4].  

Each of these objects is unusual in the shape, surface structure and the chemical 
composition. The chemical composition in these formations is sharply distinguished from 
the composition of the basic material on which these formations had arisen (tables to Fig. 


4 with chemical composition). We shall take into account that all these objects have been 

obtained under conditions of low-energy particles influence when the nuclear processes 
in materials from the traditional point of view couldn’t exist. Therefore at present there is 
no comprehensible hypothesis for the formation of such structures from the impurities. 

We shall also take into account, that the majority of the chemical elements forming 
unusual structures were not present in the initial material, and in the composition of the 
surrounding medium or in constructive details of the experimental installations.  

This 
unusual concept, as well as their possible practical application requires further 
examination of unusual structures. 
a) “Melting “bubble” on X-ray 
film (RT-2 type) after deuterium 
glow   discharge with Pd. 
b) The parallel tracks on X-ray film 
(Kodak Bio Max) after deuterium 
glow discharge with W-W cathodes.
c) “Cylindroid” (like “sausage”) on 
the nuclear emulsion after d
glow discharge with W-W cathodes
euterium 
Fig.2 The structure on the films 
placed 
outside 
of 
the 
glow 
discharge chamber with stainless 
steel wall (a, d) and quartz walls (b, 
c, 
e) 
after 
deuterium 
glow  
discharge with Pd (a, d), and with 
Zr (e), with W (b, c). 
d) Spiral structure on X-ray film 
e) The  spiral with “conic” step on X-
r. 

Marks sides on Fig.2 are following: 
(RT-2 type) after deuterium glow 
discharge with Pd. 
ray film (Kodak Bio Max) after 
deuterium glow discharge with Z
a), b), c), and e) are 100 µm; d)  -

3. Explanation and possible mechanism 

 We can offer two approaches to the explanation of the formation of such unusual 
stru


3.1. The integrated approach.  In the view of long-range action concept in which :
deve
o
ctures: integrated and differential approaches. 
lopment Feynman R.P., Yu.S.Vladimirov and others participated in the second half 
of 20th century, formation of the complex objects, capable of leaving observable traces 
with c mplex structures - TRACERS - can occur instantly and at once [6-9]. 

   As from experimental researches in the end of 20th century, the traditional concept of 
philosophical reductionism (occurrence of big object from small parts) in many cases 
showed physically insolvent. 
                                                                                                    surface after deuterium glow discharge.                                                                           
  The vivid example of this is the detection of fractional quantum effect of Hall (the 
Nobel Prize of 1998) and his theoretical interpretation by Robert Laughlin [10].  

The observable fractional charge of current carriers in semiconductors appears as a 
result of the certain condition of all semiconductors. Self-similarity as direct consequence 
of long-range action explains any transformations of substance as quantum transitions in 
the Universe.  

So, occurrence of observable forms of life in the Universe or complex structures of 
unusual chemical compound (such as  TRACERS) on surface of electrodes bombarded 
by ions are the next state of the Universe. Self-similarity of objects of the Universe could 
explain the process, but does not allow considering the dynamics of such quantum 
transitions. 


3.2. The differential approach. It is based on stage-by-stage formation of complex :
objects from more simple ones and allows considering dynamics of transitions from 
simple to complex. 

This second approach from reductionism position is traditional methodology, but, as 
against the first approach, in our case it does not allow "to skip" through the basic 
difficulties. The possibility of "cold" transmutation of atomic nucleus is not simple to 
explain from this position. We suggest overcoming these difficulties on the basis of 
consideration of a new hypothetical filamentary structure of matter.  
       The basis of using such extravagant assumption is the astrophysical data on presence 
in cosmos of the so-called dark matter which makes the most part of mass of the 
Universe.  

The dark matter can have filamentary structure.  If diameter of filament is closed to 
the diameter of atomic nucleus, they will easily pass through any dense substance of 
usual nuclear-molecular structure (through any solids, planets or stars). 

In the author’s model such filaments – fluxes - can be cylindrical atoms.   The 
nucleus of such a cylindrical atom can represent a quark - gluon filament stabilized by 
quanta of magnetic flux, and an electronic shell - an electronic Bose-liquid with 
properties of super fluidity and superconductivity. The diameter of flux electronic shell 
according to calculations is ~ 60 f [11]. 

Fluxes can create an invisible grid, which wrap round not only far Cosmos, but also 
all our planet, penetrating all bodies (solids) existing on the Earth (including us with you) 
and influencing them in the various ways. Interaction of invisible fluxes with usual 
nuclear-molecular substance could be in the various ways [11, 12]. 

The huge gradient of a magnetic field promotes an attraction to magnetic poles of 
particles with nonzero magnetic dipole moment (electrons, protons, neutrons, many 
atomic nucleus, atoms and molecules, ions) which can enter in nuclear interaction.  

Elementary calculation shows that frequency of nuclear processes on magnetic poles 
of hypothetical filaments – fluxes should reach 1014 -15 s-1, which enables evolution of an 
output power of 100 W. The approximate, rough estimation (rough guess) is given below. 

Assuming the magnetic moment µ of the shell of paramagnetic atom (molecule, ion 
with radius  ≈ 10-8 cm) to be of Bohr magneton and equivalent magnetic charge of the 
flux end (magnetic pole) to be minimal Dirac’s magnetic charge em ≈ 70 e (e is electron 
charge), one can estimate magnetic attracting force of the atomic particle to the flux end, 
F = 2µem/a3 ≈ 10-3 dyne, and the time of flight of the captured atomic particle with mass 
of ~10-23 g to the flux end to be about 10-14s. This magnetic attraction determines the 
“self-aiming” of the atomic nucleus to the flux end. Besides, if the flux end is situated 
inside or on the surface of the dense (solid or liquid) paramagnetic matter, there may 
happen up to  A.1014 nuclear interactions per second, where A is the mass number of the 
captured nucleus.  At the nuclear distance, rN
 ≈ 10-12 
cm, the attracting force of the 
nuclear particle with a magnetic moment µN
 nearly equal to the nuclear magneton (µ/µN~ 
2000) to the flux end (magnetic pole) is FN
 = 2µNem/r3N~ 5.105 
dyne and the magnetic 
energy of one nucleon capture is FNrN
 ~ 1 MeV or A MeV per one captured nucleus 
(atom). For A ~ 10 this corresponds to the power of approximately 100 W.   

Nuclear reactions can also go on lateral surface of fluxes in an electronic Bose-
liquid, which shields the electric charges of nuclei [11]. In the end, plenty atomic nuclei 
in the usual nuclear-molecular substance forming lengthways ensembles of fluxes quanta 
with the cross sizes about 100 microns [13, 14] can interact simultaneously. Thus, the 
problem of cold nuclear fusion and nuclear transmutations in the fluxes model is 
authorized by three ways: transformation of atomic nuclei on magnetic poles – ends of 
fluxes, in electronic liquid on a lateral surface fluxes and in multinuclear reactions in 
associates of fluxes nuclear ensembles.  

Due to non-conservation of spatial parity in е-capture in the powerful magnetic field 
of fluxes, the main flow of arising neutrino is directed against the force lines of a 
magnetic flow. As the result of е-capture the filaments of neutrino at the northern 
magnetic pole create jet traction which pulls the filament after North Pole (like a 
locomotive pulling its cars). At the southern magnetic pole force of reaction of neutrino 
pushes (compresses) the filament, because of which unstable movement of South Pole of 
the filament is possible. 

Due to output power of capacity during the nucleus transmutations, a part of "new" 
nucleus is formed on fluxes, in particular, nucleus with zero spin and, hence, with zero 
magnetic dipole moment. They should scatter, forming a "hot" shell of these "new" 
nuclei near fluxes filament which are inside dense nuclear-molecular substance.  Due to 
melting and evaporation of nuclear-molecular substance with its subsequent condensation 
on cold parts of the sample, nuclear active fluxes leave their complex structured traces 
both on the surface and inside samples in which they are formed (Fig.1). The nuclear 
active fluxes or complex fluxes object (we name such an object TRACER) can move 
along trace (trajectory) in the substance.  

The filamentary tracer of the structure can leave the trace without moving at all or 
moving, for example, in the perpendicular direction to a line. In Figure 5t the presumed 
mechanism of formation of the various-shaped tracers is shown. The atom-molecular 
quantum ensembles surrounding fluxes (the grey colored cylinder in Fig. 5t) push out the 
fluxes (the white colored cylinder) to the periphery of the ensemble where the 
temperature of ensemble substance is lower, the density of atoms is higher and 
probability of polynuclear reactions is the highest,  too (Fig. 5t b). Such pushing-out 
results in bending of flux and atomic-molecular ensemble surrounding it and interacting 
with it (Fig. 5t с). In turn, the bend of ensemble with fluxes can lead to turning the 
ensemble with fluxes into a ring or a spiral (Fig. 5t d, e). 

Let's note that sometimes geologists found out such spirals of microscopic sizes, for 
example, of refractory tungsten inside various compact samples (in rock) in reality. 

Н2
a   b  c     d         e     f                       g       h
a                   b                   c                       d          e            f  
Fig. 5. Flux model of strange tracks formation (5a – top row of Fig.5, 5b- bottom row of Fig.5 )  
Geologist Elena Matveeva found tungsten spirals inside 200000 year-aged rock (Fig. 6). 

Formation of more complicated bodies of cylindrical or spherical symmetry during 
warming-up by nuclear reactions (Fig. 5b f, g) is also possible. The formation of hollow 
cylinders and spheres is possible as a result of oozed gases in chemical and nuclear 
reactions in environmental substance around fluxes (Fig. 5b h). Sometimes it is possible 
that such elementary processes create hollow quasi sphere particles ("blobs") and 
extensive hollow "cylindroids" on surfaces of a metal sample (Fig. 5b a, b, c). "Blobs" 
and "cylindroids" can be broken off on the surface (or near surface) of the sample by 
internal pressure of gases contained in them, leaving in the local zones of metal surface 
the melt films formed near nuclear active fluxes. Helicoid atom-molecular shells of 
nuclear active fluxes in projection to the flat surface of sample frequently give the sine 
"paths"- "trajectory" with changed composition of the basic material (traces in Fig. 5b).  

From known mathematical Fourier’s theorem it follows that the sum of sinusoids (or 
cosinusoids) with different amplitude and period can give a track of any shape, the 
geometrical pattern repeating periodically.  Such kind of double spiral object we found 
on the X-ray film, exposed outside of glow discharge chamber after deuterium 
experiment (Fig. 2d).2  
Fig.6.The tungsten spirals 200 000 
year-aged inside the bore pit rock was 
found by geologist E. Matveeva.  

In our opinion, the origin of mysterious periodic 
patterns (chains and more complex trajectories, Fig. 1-
4) on the surface of the samples (Fig. 5b d, e, and f) 
can be explained by such kind of processes. Thus, 
concentration of the fluxes earlier not participating in 
the process of nuclear interaction with substance (Fig. 
5b e and f), but activated by electromagnetic and 
nuclear processes in various places of trace is 
possible.  

This secondary interaction of the fluxes can 
considerably complicate the trace figure. Especially 
the composite figure can arise from the cooperative 
action (combined effect) of several nuclear active 
fluxes which form, for example, enclosed spirals (Fig. 
5b f), and from activation of earlier passive secondary 
(tertiary) fluxes, transiting through a trace. 


Conclusion 

We hope that further investigations of these unusual strange formations on the 
surfaces of various materials subjected to various low-energy exposures, will allow 
establishing the true mechanism of unusual structures formation. Applied prospects of 
such examinations will naturally be defined by physics of probable unusual processes the 
examples of which we have considered. 
 

References 

 1. T.Matsumoto. Steps to the Discovery of Electro-Nuclear... 060-0813, Japan 289(1999) 
2. I.Savvatimova. Reproducibility of experimental in GD...ICCF8,  Italy, 277(2000) 
3. M. Solin Experimental facts of СF initiation... 11-th Rus. Conf... Moscow, 90(2004)  
  4. A.Agapov S., Urutskoev L.I. Proc.12-th Rus. Conf. On CF, Moscow 25(2005) 
5. B.Bogdanovich. Applied physics, Moscow, MEPhI (2000). 
6. J.Wheeler, R.Feynman. Rev. Mod. Phys., vol.24, 425(1949). 
7. Yu.Vladimirov. Moscow University Press, 264 (1996). 
 8. Yu.Vladimirov. Theory of Phys. Interactions. Moscow Univ. Press, 448 (1998).  
 9. B. Rodionov. Proc. Of 12-th Rus. Conf. On CF, 2004, Moscow 2005, pp. 136]. 
10. R. Laughlin. “The Quantum Hall Effect, ”Heidelberg : Springer, 233(1987) 
11. B.Rodionov. Gravitation & Cosmology, v.8, Supplement, 214(2002) 
12. B.Rodionov. CF of the10-th Rus. Conf., 2002. Moscow, 50(2003)  
13. B.Rodionov.  Proc.11-th Rus.CF conf. Moscow 189(2004)  
14. B. Rodionov. Proc.12-th Rus. CF Conf., Sochy,  2004, Moscow 110(2005) 
