Introduction.

The results of the investigation of cold nuclear fusion by M. Fleischmann and S.
Pons published in 1989 [1] are not accepted by scientific community until now because of rather
small amount of products of nucleus reactions and difficulties with reproduction of their
experimental results in other laboratories. The aim of our work is to develop experimental
equipment capable of synthesizing essential amount of such products. Our idea is based on the
assumption that the composition and the structure of the material saturated by deuterium may
have an essential influence on the processes occurring in the solid body at low energy reactions.
On our opinion, the intrinsic properties of the metallic matrix determine not only the ability of
the material to accumulate deuterium but also the possibility for deuterium nucleus to move and
interact.

In our work [2] we have reported on the results of deformation of titanium saturated
with deuterium and on the process of saturation. It was concluded that the results
depend on the initial structure of the sample. On the basis of the analysis of our results
and the results available in the literature, we have proposed a mechanism of nuclear
fusion via tritium channel [3].

To confirm the proposed mechanism one should carry out an experiment on generation
of a large number of products of low energy reactions. Our experimental setup is based
on the following prerequisites:
1. the synthesis of cold fusion products should be continuous,
2. the experiments should be performed at high temperature in order to
increase the rate of deuterium diffusion,
3. it is necessary to provide a directed motion of deuterium through metal.

The simplest possibility to satisfy all three conditions is to conduct the experiment in
the gaseous atmosphere of deuterium. Since the process takes place at the metal surface
[4], the reaction should be facilitated during deuterium diffusion through a membrane.
The directed motion can be achieved by a glow discharge at one side of the membrane. 


Experimental procedure.

In Fig. 1, the experimental equipment is schematically
shown.Fig. 1. Schematic of the experimental equipment: 1 reaction chamber, 2 ceramic tube, 3
nichrome curl of the furnace, 4 stainless steel cylinder, 5 Pd membrane, 6 high voltage
vacuum feedthrough, 7 anode, 8 low voltage vacuum feedthrough, 9 control
thermocouple, 10 measuring thermocouple, 11 adjustable power supply of the furnace,
12 adapter, 13 computer
The structure of a palladium foil
(Pd -99,8) having thickness of s =
0.1 mm was processed in
accordance with the principles
developed in [2]. The disk type
membrane was sealed in the tube
made of stainless steel. The
induction furnace provides heating
of the tube up to T=7000 C. After
vacuumization of the reactionary
volume, it was filled with
deuterium under P<0,07 MPa.
Glowing discharge was applied
(DC), (I=40 ma, U=350 v)

Mass-spectrometric analysis of gas content before and after the process was made on
the mass-spectrometer “Thermo Finnigan MAT 95 XP” (the resolution R=10000, the
scanning range of mass numbers 1 – 18, the ionization energy 70 eV).
The concentration of tritium was measured by a scintillation method according to the
procedure described earlier [2].

For the level of neutrons and gamma-quanta measurement a spectroscopic radiometer
SRPS-2 was used. The threshold level of neutrons Nпн = 30±2 1/50 sec and gammaquanta Nпг = 700±15 1/5 sec was not exceeded during the experiment.


Experimental results.

Temperature in the vicinity of the membrane was recorded constantly
and it is shown in Fig. 2. It can be seen that after two hours the temperature starts to fluctuate,
while the discharge current remains constant.

Fig. 3 shows
temperature fluctuations in
an increased scale. The
fluctuations are not stable
since the duration of
intervals with relatively
small and relatively large
temperature change. The
presence of temperature
fluctuations can be
explained in terms of the
model of low temperature
fusion due to resonant
transfer of neutron from
deuteron proposed in [3]. Deuterons are accumulated in the vicinity of the membrane surface.
Afterwards they move to the structure defects and form pairs of quasi-ions D2
+
. During this
process the internal stresses grow in the membrane. When these stresses attain certain value, the quasi-ions leave the metal interior and move in the field of a crystal lattice. There occurs a
resonant transfer of neutron from one deuteron to another, resulting in formation of proton and
triton nuclei accompanied by heat emission. Since a large number of deuteron pairs participate
in this reaction, the temperature fluctuations can be detected even by a thermocouple. When
internal stresses are decreased the motion of deuterium pairs ceases, high thermal conductivity
of hydrogen isotope gas results in sharp cooling and the temperature of the membrane
decreases. Then the process repeats.

The process was stopped after
t = 42 hour. A part of gas
(v=100 ml) was collected in
metallic vessel and then
analyzed by a massspectrometer. The remaining
gas was absorbed by Ti
powder (m=3 g) to analyze for
tritium

The quadrivalent helium was
not detected. The amount of
4He was on the background
level.
During the experiment, the neutron
and gamma quanta did not
exceeding the background level.
Tritium was measured by
scintillation method, and the total
amount was N>109 atoms


Conclusions

A device producing heat and tritium was proposed.
Temperature fluctuations with the amplitude of ΔT=4-50 C were recorded.
The essential increase in the amount of tritium, N>109 atoms, was registered.
It was shown that the low temperature reaction in deuterium medium occurs via the tritium
channel.


References

[1] Fleischmann M, Pons S., J Electroanal 1989; 261-301.
[2] Afonichev D.D., Murzinova M.A., Int J Hydrogen Energy 2003; 28(9): 1005–1010.
[3] Afonichev D.D., Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 2006, 31, 551-553.
[4]. Tsarev V.A., Sov Phys Usp 1992; 835:842.