Extended Abstract
Based on our concept of thermodynamic prediction of microbial interaction with radionuclides and toxic metals,
we developed novel environmental biotechnologies based on microbial pellets. The main properties of the pellets are
the following:
 high stability of pellets (due to their structure) in water solutions,
 diversified microbial communities (natural and artificial),
 compounds necessary for active microbial metabolism,
 presence of Regulators of Microbial Metabolism (RMM),
 high concentration of living microorganisms (95–98% weight of pellets).
Due to these properties, the microbial communities of pellets carry out many types of interaction with radionuclides.
The interactions are divided into three groups. The first group is outside the cell, the second is on the cell
membrane of microorganisms, and the third is inside the cell. When radionuclides are added into a metabolically active
culture radionuclides-oxidizers are reduced by microbial exometabolites-reducers to insoluble compounds (51CrO2􀀀
4
to insoluble 51Cr(OH)3 nH2O# or 238UO2OH+ to insoluble 238UO2 #). Simultaneously the precipitation of radionuclides
with exometabolites takes place, e.g.

Table 1. Efﬁciency of extraction of radionuclides by microbial pellets from liquid radioactive waste
(LRW).

*Indicates less than sensibility of spectrometer (1.0× 10−12 Ki/kg).
** Radioactive wastewater of the Institute for Nuclear Research (the National Academy of Sciences of
Ukraine) measured by Valeriy Shevel.

194Hg2+ + CO2−
=194 HgCO2−
↓
and
60Co2+ + S2− →60 CoS ↓ .

It is also possible to bind radionuclides with exopolysaccharides, which are excreted by cells into the external
space. Furthermore, the following process occurs on the external cellular structures. Radionuclides substitute stere-
ochemical analogues in the cell wall. Thus, 90Sr2+ and Ca2+ have equal ionic radii (IR), 0.11 nm. Similarly, ionic
radii of 239Pu6+ and Mg2+ are equal 0.075 nm that is why 239Pu6+ substitutes Mg2+ in the cell wall. Additional ra-
dionuclides are actively transported into cells also due to stereochemical analogy of radionuclides and macroelements.
The acceptor and transport systems of microorganisms are activated to transfer radionuclides together with macroele-
ments inside cells. For example, since 51CrO2−
and SO2−
has equal ionic radii 0.300 nm radioactive chromium is
actively transported in cells. Ions of 90Sr2+ are transported in the same way, since they have the same ionic radii with
Ca2+. After transfer into cells, radionuclides-oxidizers are reduced by redox enzymes to insoluble compounds, and
also precipitated by metabolites.

Table 2. Types of interaction of microorganisms with radionuclides.

We were able to effectively extract radionuclides using microbial pellets, from liquid radioactive waste obtained
from the Institute for Nuclear Research of the National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine. The efﬁciency of extraction
of radionuclides was high. Within three days, the activity of the solution decreased on average by 4–5 orders due to
the accumulation of radionuclides in microbial pellets (Table 1).

Based on the thermodynamic predictive method, it is possible to explain the high efﬁciency of radionuclides ex-
traction by microorganisms as follows (Table 2).

Thus, we have shown the possibility of using the thermodynamic predictive method to develop effective, novel
biotechnologies for puriﬁcation of liquid radioactive waste from a wide range of radionuclides. Obviously, the method
developed by us will be effective for biotechnologies for puriﬁcation of any types of liquid radioactive waste.
