A Dialogue on Chemically Induced Nuclear Effects—
A Guide for the Perplexed About Cold Fusion,
by Nate Hoffman. Published by the American Nuclear Society (ANS) with support from the Electric Power
Research Institute (EPRI), 1995, ISBN:0-89448-558-X, 223 pages (69 pages as appendices),


“ADDENDUM
“Comments were made in this text that the
work performed by SRI INTERNATIONAL
was difficult to examine in detail because
that lab was reticent to share experimental
details of a potentially profitable field of
research. This experimental secrecy was
partially lifted by the following Report to
EPRI:
“McKubre, M. C. H., et al., 'Development of
Advanced Concepts for Nuclear Processes
in Deuterated Metals,' TR-104195,
Research Project 3170-01, Final Report,
August 1994.”

This is a strange little book. It well written
in some parts, with knowledgeable, indepth,
analysis. Yet elsewhere the author
makes factual errors that might easily have
been avoided. Some of his mistakes are
mind-boggling, like his suggestions that
chemical supply companies sell used moderator
heavy water from CANDU fission
reactors, or that no researcher in any cold
experiment has ever measured true rms
power. The focus of the book is wrong. It
covers a few backwater aspects of cold
fusion. It describes a handful of unimportant,
botched experiments while it ignores
the real work. The most important fact
about cold fusion is that it produces excess
heat beyond the limits of chemistry. As
Fleischmann says, “heat is the principal
signature of the reaction.” In most experiments,
heat is the easiest parameter to
measure, giving the highest signal-tonoise
ratio. Yet Hoffman does not discuss
any experiments in which excess heat was
observed. He censors them out, he pretends
they do not exist. This eliminates
most of the literature. In the second paragraph
of the book, Hoffman says that Pons
and Fleischmann claimed excess heat, but
that is the last we hear about the subject
until the closing remarks. He never says
that hundreds of other scientists replicated
their findings. He never mentions any particulars
about heat. There is no discussion
of power; net energy; energy versus mass
(megajoules per mole of cathode material);
power density; temperature; current density
and other triggering mechanisms; or
metallurgical conditions and surface treatments
required to generate excess heat.

This censorship of anything relating to
heat is carried to absurd extremes. A short
chapter on calorimetry, titled “Possible This censorship of anything relating to
heat is carried to absurd extremes. A short
chapter on calorimetry, titled “Possible Artifacts Associated with Heat
Measurements in Palladium/Deuterium
Systems” contains only speculation about
hypothetical errors, and no actual calorimetric
data from any experiment. Chapters
that deal with things like neutrons, charged
particles, and helium contain references to
the literature, samples of data from published
experiments, and comments from
researchers. But the chapter on calorimetry
has no data from any cold fusion paper,
even though the majority of papers in the
field deal with this subject. Other chapters
have extensive bibliographies; this chapter
lists four items from outside the literature
(including a reference to the Fluke instrument
company Catalog), and this whimsical
little note:  “Note: Listed bibliography concentrates
solely on artifact considerations, not on the
numerous studies of heat generation in
deuterium / solid systems.”

McKubre observed megajoules of excess
heat per mole at high signal to noise ratios,
using superb calorimeters, so Hoffman
censored him. This Addendum lists only
McKubre; it should have listed papers from
Pons and Fleischmann, Kunimatsu, Storms,
Oriani, Gozzi, Aoki, Huggins, Okamoto and
dozens of other top scientists who Hoffman
ignored. The Addendum of missing papers
and data should have been as long as the
Fusion Facts bibliography (more than 100
pages). On the back page, reviewer
Tillbrook of the ANS describes this book as
“wide in scope.” It is just the opposite. This
is a classic case of academic tunnel vision,
in which the author refuses to examine 99%
of the published papers because he disagrees
with their conclusions.

Let us start at the end, and look at this
afterthought Addendum carefully, because it epitomizes the whole book.

1. Hoffman asserts that SRI's work has been
secret until the Final Report was published
in August 1994. This is incorrect. SRI
revealed copious details in 1991 at the
Second International Conference (ICCF2) (1)
at ICCF3 in 1992 (2) at ICCF4 in 1993(3); in
the Journal of Electroanalytical Chemistry
article of 1994 (4); and at ICCF5. McKubre
and others have discussed this work in formal
lectures at MIT(5) (M.I.T. EECS-LECTURE,
Sept. 24, 1992), Texas A&M, and
elsewhere. The Final Report does contain
new details, but it does not have any surprises
or new information that would
impact upon the arguments in this book.
Everything Hoffman needed to know was
published five years ago. On page 75, he
gives one example of one detail that SRI has
not shared. Just because SRI did not share
one detail he wanted, that does not mean
he can justify ignoring the great mass of
information they did share.

2. Hoffman asserts that SRI's work was difficult
to examine when the book was written.
Yet every other review of the field written in
the last five years discusses SRI's work, and
dozens of other papers reference it.

3. He says that the lab was “reticent to
share experimental details” because this
field is potentially profitable. He asserts as
a general rule that you cannot get sufficient
scientific information in areas of research
driven by industrial profits. Yet, most
research and development in most fields is
for profit. Countless journals, magazines
and textbooks are devoted to purely commercial
R&D areas like semiconductors and
oil refining.

4. This book was published with support
from EPRI. The Forward was written by
Thomas Schneider of EPRI. EPRI paid for
McKubre's research at SRI and Wolf's
research at Texas A&M, and it published
the Final Report that barely made it into the
Addendum. Schneider has been a known
behind-the-scenes bitter opponent of cold
fusion for many years, but he must have
been aware of McKubre's numerous publications
over the years, and he must have
realized that McKubre's data contradicts
Hoffman's conclusions. He should have told
Hoffman to include something about
McKubre. Schneider and Hoffman want to
present a one-sided picture. They want to
prove that all positive results are due to “an
unidentified error or artifact,” as Schneider
puts it.

McKubre's experiments are among the
most important in this field. McKubre has
been a keynote speaker at all five
International Conferences, three of which
Hoffman attended. Yet Hoffman does not even mention McKubre's work. This is not a
minor oversight; it is a fatal flaw. Hoffman
makes many incorrect statements about
calorimetry and experimental technique. If
he had taken the time to look carefully at
McKubre, or Pons and Fleischmann,
Storms, or any of the other mainstream
workers, he would have caught these mistakes.
The experiments do not fit the patterns
he describes. The potential errors he
speculates about could not have occurred.
The equipment and protocols are designed
to rule out these errors. In many experiments,
the magnitude of the excess heat
alone rules out the errors he speculates
about. For example, he mentions that bubbles
on cooling coils can sometimes insulate
the electrolyte, raising the temperature
slightly. In leading experiments the temperature
rose thousands of times higher
than bubble formation could explain.

For people who already know the field,
this book is old hat, or a stroll down memory
lane. A scientist who is thinking about
doing these experiments for the first time
who knows nothing about the field will find
valuable information, although I recommend
reading the original sources instead.
Hoffman's writing style is clear and forceful.
His own comments are often helpful,
and to his credit he has brought good
material from wide-ranging sources, like
the checklist of potential errors measuring
tritium, from Carol Talcott-Storms on page
61, the statistical analysis by Tolly on page
89, and the Appendices written by G. Miley
and B. Oliver. The bibliography is pretty
good too, except, of course, it does not list
the major papers about excess heat. (One
or two minor papers about heat did creep
into the chapter about tritium).


A Cute Presentation Format, But It Gets
on Your Nerves

This book is written in an odd but
appealing format. It is an imaginary
Socratic conversation; a series of questions
and answers between a Young Scientist
(YS) and an Old Metallurgist (OM,
Hoffman's alter ego). I have never seen a
serious scientific book written as an imaginary
conversation. In the chapters on history
and the overview this format is effective,
but in the technical chapters it
becomes tiresome.

The tone of the writing is irritating. It is
hypocritical. Hoffman trashes cold fusion
by pretending the dramatic successful
experiments never happened, and by
grossly misrepresenting other experiments.
He pretends to be impartial. He
even makes a show of being solicitous
toward the cold fusion scientists. He uses
little of the heavy-handed mockery and
harsh language you see in attacks against
cold fusion by Huizenga, Taubes or
Morrison. Unlike the American Physical
Society officials, he makes no accusations
of criminality or lunacy, he does not say
that cold fusion scientists are half-wit suicidal
Branch Davidians(6). Hoffman criticizes
Taubes. Occasionally, he praises a
few experiments. In a short chapter titled
“Experiments Without Apparent Artifacts,”

Hoffman says that Chien's experiment at
Texas A&M, Claytor's work at Los Alamos,
and a few other experiments seem to be
free of error. He did not include any that
showed excess heat. (He says that Russ
George's work at E-Quest is “interesting,”
but he does not mention that it produces
excess heat.) His Mister Nice Guy tone and
his occasionally pat-on-the-head praise of
a few cold fusion scientists will make a
naïve reader think that Hoffman really is
even-handed, and he really has presented
“a broad review” conducted in an “open
minded” fashion, as the book jacket blurbs
claim. A blurb from Steve Jones says:
“Dr. Hoffman's treatise on anomalous nuclear
effects in deuterided materials has been looked
upon as pro-cold-fusion and paradoxically as
anti-cold-fusion. It is neither. Rather, I see Dr.
Hoffman's book as a significant effort to scrutinize
relevant observations with care . . .”

This book does not “scrutinize relevant
observations.” It buries them! It ignores
them, just as Jones himself does. This is a
narrow, biased, anti-cold-fusion tract masquerading
as a broad review. The relevant
data has been stripped out because it contradicts
the point of view Hoffman,
Schneider, and Jones want to foist on the
reader. This book demonstrates why you
should never depend upon a review of a
scientific field, particularly a controversial
field. You must also read original sources.


Masterful Analysis of Non-Issues

Many of the topics Hoffman chose to
address are non-existent, non-issues. His
analysis and presentation of these topics is
sometimes masterful. He does a superb job
in describing the problems, he includes the
details, facts, and hard numbers you need
when you check the literature to see if these
problems marred the experiments. But he
does not say that the hypothetical problems
he describes do not exist in the real world. 

The short chapter about calorimetry
“Possible Artifacts Associated with Heat
Measurements”. . . and its whimsical phantom
bibliography is described above. It is a
masterpiece of obfuscation. In it, Hoffman
carefully avoids saying anything about any
actual cold fusion experimental result. On
the surface, it is a technical discussion of
hard facts. He talks about the Joule-
Thompson effect in detail. Taking a 10.6
gram cathode (which he says is a “typical
mass,” but which I think is larger than
usual), he says: “The maximum loss of deuterium
is from a stoichiometry corresponding
to pressures of 0.2 in the shear modulus,
which occurs at a loading of about
PdD0.9, to the stoichiometry of one atmosphere
of D2, which occurs at roughly
PdD0.65 as one can see from this phase
diagram (Figure 6.2). ” Working through the
diagrams and figures, we find that with
10.6 grams of palladium, under extremely
rare circumstances, the Joule-Thompson
effect might slowly store and then suddenly
release a one-time burst as large as 2.18
kilojoules. With some types of calorimeters,
under some circumstances, this might
appear to be a positive burst, rather than
zero-sum energy storage and release. In
many cold fusion experiments, including
the ones at SRI, continuous generation from
small cathodes adds up to far more than
2.18 kilojoules. Some cathodes have produced
a hundred thousand times more
energy than this. Therefore, cold fusion
cannot be an artifact of the Joule-
Thompson effect. Hoffman leaves the reader
with the impression that this might be a
significant artifact even though his own
analysis proves it is not. 

Other topics discussed briefly include the
effect bubble formation on the insulating
quality of the cell and mixing. In any
calorimeter, it is essential that you ensure
the cooling fluid or electrolyte is properly
mixed. Everyone doing cold fusion knows
this, and in every experiment I have read
about, proper mixing is assured. Mixing is
important but so elementary that no scientist
would overlook it.

Sometimes he goes to extremes, raising
points that he must know are disingenuous.
The worst example is at the end of the
chapter where the gullible Young Scientist
asks: “do the experimenters use rms voltmeters?”
The Old Metallurgist answers like
a crafty lawyer:
“OM: To my knowledge, no electrochemist
involved in these calorimetric studies uses rms
meters. Calorimetry specialists have raised this
point many times, but the heat-measuring cold
fusion community has rather 'heatedly' replied
that rms meters are not required.
“YS: On what basis do they justify not using rms
meters?
“OM: Their claim is that they routinely examine
the output signal with cathode-ray tubes and see
no signal that is hashy enough to justify rms
meters.
“YS: Certainly a cathode-ray tube readout should
be a sufficient instrument for ruling out the necessity
of rms voltmeters, but I'm surprised. . . ”

First of all, this is nonsense. Many cold
fusion scientists use rms meters to mea-sure power, as well as oscilloscopes, but
more to the point, they all use computer
systems with fast data acquisition boards.
These not only measure true rms power
better than most meters, but they also
integrate power to measure energy.
Nobody relies upon a meter. Does Hoffman
imagine that graduate students are posted
to watch a meter 24 hours a day, writing
down the power levels and graphing them
by hand?

The chapter concludes:
“OM: Well, that is a quick rundown on possible
heat artifacts. In general, these heat measurements
are being done by very knowledgeable
experimenters who know how to avoid artifacts.”
How kind of Hoffman to mention this! As
Anthony put it: “For Brutus is an honorable
man; So are they all, all honorable men. . . ”


Mind Boggling Mistakes 

Every so often, Hoffman goes off on a
tangent and makes wildly incorrect statements.
Most of chapter 3, Radioactivity
Artifacts, is devoted to a discussion of used
moderator water from fission reactors,
which he believes may be causing artifacts
in some cold fusion experiments. The discussion
begins:
“OM: There are strong indications that commercially
sold heavy water may contain variable contents
of used moderator water from either
CANDU-type nuclear reactors or Savannah Rivertype
weapons production reactors.
“YS: What would indicate that?
“OM: The indicator is the enormous variation in
the tritium-to-deuterium (T/D) ratio in different
batches of heavy water. . .
“YS: But why in the world would the commercial
suppliers mix any used moderator water into
their feedstocks?
“OM: As to why, one cannot just pour used moderator
heavy water from these reactors down the
drain– the tritium content is too high– and
besides, heavy water is not all that cheap . . .”
This is followed by a five-page, in-depth
discussion of how used moderator water
might affect a cold fusion experiment.
Hoffman speculates that uranium from the
reactor might contaminate the water. He
includes a table of Alpha Emissions for a
nanogram of uranium decay isotopes. The
first three pages of the next chapter
describe how corrosion products from zirconium
fission fuel cladding in commercial
heavy water probably explain the isotopic
and chemical changes seen in palladium
cathode surfaces. This is a carefully presented,
detailed, professional-looking
exposition. It is also a preposterous flight
of fancy. The levels of tritium and other
dangerous contaminants in used moderator
water are millions of times too high for
the water to be cleaned up and sold to the
public for any purpose. I faxed this section
to Ontario Hydro, the company that produces
90% of the world's supply of heavy
water for use in their Canadian designed
CANDU reactors. They responded with a
detailed two-page fax, in which they show
that Hoffman's idea is, quote: pure nonsense.
They said that the specific activity of
tritium in newly refined virgin heavy water
varies from 0.05 to 0.17 μCi/kg (microcuries/kilogram), depending on the
method of refining and the site of the refinery
plant. Tritium levels above 2.0 μCi/kg
is considered dangerously radioactive, and
must be handled by trained personnel
wearing appropriate protective clothing,
using special equipment. In an operational
CANDU power reactor, the moderator water
contains 107 μCi/kg, and research reactors
generally contain 106 μCi/kg. Furthermore,
this water contains many other contaminants
even more dangerous than tritium, including
long-lived alpha and gamma emitters.
Removing these radioactive contaminants
would be far more expensive than refining
virgin heavy water from ordinary water. In
order to reduce the tritium to safe levels you
would have to mix the moderator water with
virgin heavy water in a ratio of 1 to
100,000,000. Ontario Hydro concludes:
“Used moderator water can often be re-sold, but
only to other reactor operators. . . . Ontario Hydro
dominates the world's nuclear market for heavy
water and the world's non-nuclear wholesale
market, and we have never attempted to use
diluted, cleaned-up old moderator water for our
non-nuclear markets.”
The letter points out that some of
Hoffman's other speculation about heavy
water is also wrong:
“Theoretically, deuterium gas produced by electrolysis
has lower D/T ratio than the source D2O.
However, in practice, there is no difference, as the
separation factor is so small, and the operation is
done in a single stage process. . . . [Hoffman's]
suggestion that commercial D2 gas suppliers
must start with heavy water that is higher in tritium
activity than any commercially available
product any is also pure nonsense. Ontario Hydro
is one of the world's major deuterium gas suppliers
and we provide heavy water to one of the
world's other major suppliers. The heavy water
starting material is our normal virgin product.”

Hoffman went badly astray here. He made
a wild guess that was wrong by eight orders
of magnitude. He should have called
Ontario Hydro to check out these weird
ideas. Why didn't his editor or Schneider
catch this? Did Schneider read the book
before he wrote the Forward? The text that
Hoffman himself wrote (excluding material
from other authors) is only 130 pages, and
he reportedly worked on it for several years.
In all that time he should have taken a few
minutes to call Ontario Hydro. This is not a
minor issue. If Hoffman had tucked this
idea in a footnote, as a throwaway suggestion,
then I suppose his editors and reviewers
might have overlooked it. But he devoted
eight pages to it! Six percent of the
book! He devotes zero pages to excess
heat; power density; temperature; triggering
mechanisms; current density; cathode
testing techniques and other topics most
people think are the key to the phenomenon.
And that is not the only glaring error
in the book. It is the most egregious mistake,
but the statements about rms meters
and calorimetry run a close second.

Hoffman's publisher and reviewers at the
American Nuclear Society and EPRI are
among the world's leading experts in
nuclear fission. EPRI performs the most advanced nuclear power reactor research
and development in the world. They spend
hundreds of millions of dollars designing
new fission power reactors. How could a
leading expert at EPRI like Schneider fail to
realize that no chemical supply house could
sell used heavy water? Jones asserts that
Hoffman is careful. Did Jones read the
book? I believe that Hoffman, Schneider,
Jones and the others did not overlook these
mistakes. They ignored them, because they
do not take this field seriously. They do not
care whether the arguments marshaled
against cold fusion are scientifically correct
or pure nonsense. They will use any tactic
to discredit the field. They ignore positive
experiments; they pretend that McKubre
does not exist; and they toss out scientifically
illiterate arguments like used moderator
water. They publish these absurd arguments
on Internet and in books like this in
order to confuse the issue. They want to
drown out reasoned scientific debate with
chaotic nonsense and mind-boggling mistakes.
They want to lower the standards of
science so that instead of looking at carefully
derived data, superb calorimetry, and
meticulously worked out theories, we go
chasing off after used moderator water and
other phantasmagoria.


Focus on Botched Experiments

Hoffman devotes much of this book to
statements from people who are not qualified
to discuss cold fusion. This reaches
extremes in Chapter 8, in which he
describes a farcical scientific conference
held in 1991 called the Half Moon Bay
Review, which was billed as an “in-depth
review of cold fusion.” It was sponsored by
Schneider and arranged by Hoffman himself.
There were three ground rules:
“1. No firm 'believers' in cold fusion were to be
included.
“2. 'Skeptics' were welcome as long as we felt that
such a scientist could be objective about presented
data.
“3. Each scientist panel member should be among
the top few in the technical area for which he or
she was selected.”

In actual practice, Rule 1 meant that no
competent cold fusion scientist was invited
to join the Review Panel, and Rule 3 was
ignored. The assembled “experts” specialize
in neutrons and high-temperature plasma
physics. Not a single one of them has
ever published a serious paper on cold
fusion or performed a cold fusion experiment.
EPRI did not even invite their own
expert electrochemist, McKubre, who is
widely acknowledged as being one of the
best in the world. This is like holding a conference
on Tokamak hot fusion reactors
and inviting only electrochemists.

The conference called in four experimental
groups for the Review Panel to pass
judgment upon: the Texas A&M cyclotron
group (Kevin Wolf); Rocketdyne Helium
Mass Spectroscopy Group; the Brigham
Young University (BYU) 'Anomalous Nuclear
Effects' Group; the Colorado School of
Mines. Unfortunately, in 1991, none of
these groups had ever done cold fusion
calorimetry, which is at the heart of the 
experiment. The first two groups had
assisted others in post-experiment analysis,
but they themselves had not done any
experiments. The Review Panel might have
called in any number of scientists who had
done competent experiments and seen
positive results, but they decided not to.
Their conclusion was pre-ordained, given
the people they called in: “We were not presented
with (nor are we aware of) any consistently
reproducible data that shows
anomalous nuclear effects in deuterium/
metal systems. ” Perhaps if they had
invited a scientist who claimed to see such
effects, he might have told them about it.

Since there was no one on the panel qualified
to judge cold fusion, and since they
only invited scientists whose experiments
failed, I think this Conference was a deliberate
attempt to discredit the field—just
like the original DOE panel in 1989. If I am
right, the review panel will never reconvene
and call in the same groups again, because
subsequently two of them saw definitive
evidence of cold fusion. Kevin Wolf saw
dramatic transmutations [See IE, Vol.1,
No.2], which is exactly the sort of nuclear
evidence the panel claimed it was looking
for. Wolf himself denies that this is evidence
of cold fusion; he claims that the
transmutations have nothing to do with the
fact that the cathodes were in a test tube
undergoing electrolysis with heavy water.
He thinks that by a fantastic coincidence,
the cathode was hit by a hypothetical WIMP
particle (or its products) from outer space!
No other scientist with whom I have spoken
believes that. Appendix D of this book is
the report from the Rocketdyne Group,
written in 1993. Long after the Half Moon
Bay Review, Rocketdyne saw definitive evidence
of helium in three groups of experiments.
They dispute the first one, from
China Lake (Miles), although their reasons
are spurious. They do not dispute Texas
A&M (Chien, Bockris) or E-Quest. Hoffman
should have said this back in Chapter 8. He
should have pointed out that subsequent
work from two of these groups negated the
conclusions of the panel.

Hoffman describes in loving detail some
experiments performed by Steve Jones of
BYU to detect low level neutrons. He
devotes many pages to a whimsical experiment
performed by Jones in which
Portland cement was mixed with heavy
water. This is interesting science. It sounds
like fun. But it has nothing to with mainstream
cold fusion. In any case, these
experiments failed to produce definitive
results. At ICCF4, Jones retracted most of
his earlier claims. Hoffman writes a lot
about this sort of marginal, flawed,
retracted work, and he does not even mention
hundreds of positive, replicated cold
fusion experiments. In a short book on cold
fusion, why would anyone devote several
pages to Portland cement and never get
around to mentioning McKubre or
Kunimatsu? Hoffman also discusses Jones'
palladium experiments, but these experiments
prove nothing:

The experiments were incompetently
performed. No attention was paid to critical critical
techniques like keeping the electrolyte
and cathode clean. At Kamiokande, the
workers were actually shown on Japanese
NHK national television touching the metal
surface of the cathode with their bare
hands.(7) This is appalling sloppiness.
• They did not attempt to measure critical
parameters like loading. They performed no
pre-testing of cathodes. They made no
attempt to raise current density to high
enough levels, and they made no attempt
trigger the reaction by heating up the sample
or with some other well known method.
• They did not attempt to measure excess
heat. There is no point to looking for neutrons
unless you are sure you have a cold
fusion reaction, and the only certain sign of
a cold fusion reaction is a burst of excess
heat. The heat is far easier to detect than
the neutrons, and it is unambiguous.
People have argued for years about the
trace levels of neutrons detected in some
cold fusion experiments. Jones himself has
retracted some neutron measurements. In
contrast, nobody has ever retracted any of
the high power calorimetry (power above
one watt), and the skeptics have never
offered any serious arguments to disprove
it. The level of neutrons in cold fusion is
millions of times lower than it is for hot
fusion, so looking for neutrons without first
verifying the heat is folly.

Hoffman and Jones ignore one of the few
things we know with certainty about cold
fusion: it is nearly aneutronic. It does not
produce neutrons commensurate with a hot
fusion process. Cold fusion is nothing like
fission or hot fusion. Suppose a scientist
was given two samples of uranium and told
to find out which one was undergoing
intense fission. He could try measuring the
surface temperature of the metal, but it
would be far better to use a Geiger counter,
because the principle signature of fission is
ionizing radiation. The principle signature
of cold fusion is heat. This fact was established
during the first five minutes of the
first cold fusion experiment that produced
measurable levels of excess heat. It is
known as the dead graduate student problem.
If cold fusion was hot fusion, a cell
producing a fraction of a watt of heat would
generate such intense radiation that in a
matter of minutes it would kill the people
standing nearby. Yet many observers,
including me, have stood next to cold
fusion reactions and we are alive and well.

Jones and many others argue that all of
those scientists who reported excess heat
have made a mistake in their calorimetry.
This is the heart of the cold fusion debate.
Schneider says that in the Forward, in what
I call the subtle yet massive yet invisible
unknown error hypothesis. He says: “the
alternative explanation, that the anomalous
heat measurements are not from nuclear
reactions but are the result of an unidentified
error or artifact, appears to me to be
the only viable explanation of 'cold fusion.'”
He does not attempt to guess what error
this might be. Schneider knows as well as I
do that many cold fusion experiments have
yielded very high power, some as high as
180 watts.(8) It takes a gigantic error to
produce a false reading of 180 watts.
Gigantic errors are inherently easy to spot. They are caught during calibration.(9)

Schneider wants to have it both ways. He
wants an error so big that anyone would
see it instantly, and so small that several
thousand scientists have failed to see it
over six years of intense research. The fact
is, for the last 200 years, scientists have
been using calorimeters to measure multiple-
watt power levels. Measuring milliwatts
is tricky, but watts are easy. There are few
scientific techniques as cut and dry and as
reliable as calorimetry in this domain. The
basic techniques were described in my
daughter's third-grade science textbook.(
10) At any large high school science
fair you will find experiments using
calorimetry accurate and precise enough to
measure the power levels observed in the
leading cold fusion experiments. (I counted
four calorimeters at last year's Dekalb
County Fair.)

Schneider, Jones and Hoffman know
there are no significant errors in the
calorimetry of the mainstream professional
scientists working in this field. They pretend
there might be an error. They never
specify which error, because they know
there cannot be one. If the invisible error
hypothesis really was “a viable explanation,”
as Schneider claims, he would list two
or three potential candidates that fit the
data. When pressed, opponents like
Schneider and Hoffman always come up
with a list of minor sources of error like the
Joule-Thompson effect, which, thanks to
Hoffman's own discussion, we see is many
orders of magnitude too small to explain
the data.

Schneider wants to artificially limit the
debate to two options: either cold fusion is
a standard hot-fusion style nuclear
process, or it is a mistake. He wants to discuss
these two hypotheses alone, excluding
all others, even though these two were disproved
years ago. He does not admit that
cold fusion may be something new and different.
He ignores the theoretical work of
people like Schwinger, Hagelstein, Chubb
and Chubb, and Preparata. He wants to
limit the debate to two equally impossible,
equally sterile hypotheses. Hoffman tries to
steer clear of this issue, but he also pretends
that Schwinger, Hagelstein and the
others do not exist. Occasionally he hints
that “a new paradigm ” might be needed,
but he does not mention any of the new
theories. He does not give the name of a
single theoretician!


The Rockwell Rocketdyne Report

Appendix D is a 35 page report written by
Brian Oliver of Rockwell International, titled
“Summary of Helium Analysis Conducted by
Rocketdyne Under EPRI Funding.” This is
one of bright spots in the book. Since July
1989, Rockwell has worked with many cold
fusion research labs around the world,
looking for evidence of helium in used
cathodes and in samples of effluent gas.
They tested materials from the University of
Utah, ETEC, China Lake, Osaka University,
E-Quest, and others. Their procedures and
instruments are described in detail.

The Rockwell Rocketdyne facility is wide-ly considered to be the best in the world at
measuring helium. The hot fusion Tokamak
programs contract with it to do helium
analysis. Even John Huizenga, the archenemy
of cold fusion, once said that if
Rockwell found helium from a cold fusion
experiment, he would endorse those
results in writing. At ICCF4 Huizenga said
that to Russ George and me. Unfortunately,
his resolve did not last long. George and I
talked to Hoffman and another Rockwell
representative at the conference. We
agreed we would find the money to pay for
the work, and they agreed to test the
George's E-Quest samples. When we told
Huizenga, he panicked and reneged, saying
he would not endorse the results after all.
His exact words were: “I will leave it up to
you fellows.” Nevertheless, during that
hour when he thought there was no chance
Rockwell would agree, and no chance we
would find a way to pay, Huizenga was
confident enough to stake his reputation
on Rockwell's work. It is a pity he chickened
out because, as this chapter shows,
Rockwell did test the E-Quest samples
from the Los Alamos experiments, and
their tests did prove that the excess heat
comes from a nuclear reaction (at least in
part). Experiments that did not generate
excess heat showed 0.4 ppm helium.
Experiments that did generate excess heat
yielded helium far above that background
level, at levels as high as 552 ppm, 100
times atmospheric concentration. Rockwell
also looked at the ratio of 3He to 4He as
well as 22Ne to 4He in the samples and
found the isotopic ratios prove the helium
could not possibly have come from contamination
from normal terrestrial helium.
This report says that these results have
also been confirmed by other helium mass
spectrometry at the U.S. Bureau of Mines
(Amarillo, TX) and by SRI International. It
says reactions in the E-Quest system are
“characterized by the production of heat”
but it glosses over important details. does
not say that the power level is at hundreds
of watts, or that the levels of 3He and 4He
are proportional to the net energy produced
by the device.

 Hoffman mentions E-Quest briefly elsewhere
in the book but he gives no details,
except in one spot. In Table 10.1, on page
130, “Anomalous Nuclear Measurement
Examples,” he slips in a cryptic reference to
E-Quest. He tries hard to disguise it. In this
table, the name E-Quest is not mentioned;
there is nothing about 4He; there is no reference
to Appendix D; and naturally there
is no mention of heat (a forbidden subject!).
But he does include this comment
which I suppose must refer to E-Quest:
“3He; only one questionable measurement of
3He; one gas sample claimed to be from cavitation
experiment showed high 3He.”
It is hard to know what to make of this.
Perhaps Hoffman finds his own laboratory
at Rockwell “questionable” for reasons he
does not reveal. Nobody else finds it questionable,
but perhaps he has some inside
information that calls into doubt Rockwell's ability to measure 3He at levels thousands
of times above the natural background.
From the phrase “claimed to be,” I conclude
that Hoffman does not fully believe the
samples came from E-Quest's experiments
at Los Alamos. I cannot imagine where else
he thinks they might have come from.
Perhaps he imagines that someone else at
Los Alamos synthesized or obtained 3He,
put it in $500 steel collection flasks, and
shipped it to Rockwell as a joke.

Oliver's report shows that other tests, on
cathodes and gas from other laboratories,
were not as definitive as E-Quest, but some
of them did show that helium has been created.
Even when experiments yielded
excess heat, most of the cathodes did not
have elevated levels of helium or unnatural
isotopic ratios. I suppose that means the
reaction usually occurs near the surface,
and the helium ash is lost with the effluent
gas. Rockwell found clear positive results
from two other groups besides E-Quest:
China Lake, and Texas A&M.

Melvin Miles at China Lake (11) found
helium in effluent gas samples proportional
to excess heat. I discussed the Rockwell
report with Miles. He pointed out that it is
marred by misunderstandings and out-ofdate
information. Rockwell suspects that
the helium may have come from contamination;
that is, helium leaking through the
glass. The report discusses this at length,
but this possibility was ruled out years ago:
• The helium is proportional to the excess
heat. There is no mechanism that would
allow selective leaking in of helium through
the glass weeks after a fraction of a watt of
excess heat was generated. When you look
a simple presence or absence test, the
proof is even more stark. When there was
no heat, there was no significant helium;
when there was heat, there was easily
detected levels of helium. The glass cannot
know whether there was heat, and the
excess was too small to weaken the glass or
chemically change it to leak faster.
• Miles later repeated the experiments with
steel collection flasks, and found the same
results. Steel is more resistant to helium
penetration than glass.
• Miles sent samples in both glass and
steel collection flasks to other laboratories,
including the University of Texas and SRI.
They too confirmed the helium.
• The experiments are continuing, and
Miles still observes excess heat and a positive
correlation with helium. Over the past
year, he has seen as much heat as his best
earlier results. He has not yet been able to
publish results from the last year.
Rockwell found no helium in the China Lake
cathodes. Miles points out that he would
not expect to find any, even if it had
evolved inside the cathode during the
excess heat runs. After every run with heavy
water, the cathodes were electrolyzed with
ordinary water to recalibrate.(12) This
would probably purge any significant helium
from the cathode. Miles told that to
Rockwell, but they neglected to mention it
in the report.

Oliver describes the analysis of the Chien
(13,14) cathodes from Texas A&M in detail After hemming and hawing, he concludes
in italics:
“Small amounts of 4He were observed in 7 of the
16 specimens analyzed, 5 of these 7 were for
specimens that had been etched. Six of the 7
'positive' 4He results were for AM-Pd4. Unlike the
results obtained earlier, the results for the present
group are more heterogeneous, and also do
not show any clear correlation with either sample
surface area (Figure D.6) or with etch depth
(Figure D.7). This would suggest that the small
amounts of 4He observed in the Chun-Ching
Chien cathode material from the electrolysis
experiments performed in Professor Bockris's
laboratory are indeed heterogeneous and extend
to depths greater than ~4μm.”


Hoffman Argues With Himself

The saddest part of this book comes close
to the end, where Hoffman confronts the
most important aspect of cold fusion: the
heat. Heat is the principle signature of the
reaction, and it is also the best, most ironclad
proof that the effect is real. I found this
section heartbreaking. Here is the spectacle
of a man who knows how to do good science;
a man who knows the facts and the
literature, who cannot bring himself to face
the truth. Hoffman is stuck in a time warp,
arguing about issues that were settled
years ago, and issues that make no scientific
sense. In the Socratic dialog format
Hoffman appears to enjoy playing the
devil's advocate and arguing with himself. It
is playful. The Young Scientist acts as a foil,
allowing the Old Metallurgist to strut his
stuff and impress the reader, which he does
at times. In this section, the argument gets
out of hand. It gets ugly. A split personality
emerges, as if he really is arguing with
himself. I sense that Hoffman sincerely
wants to confront the issue, but he cannot
bring himself to do so. He skirts the issue.
He approaches the answer, he gets to heart
of the matter for a moment, and then suddenly
he changes the subject, as if he cannot
stand to look at the truth for long. The
dialog begins: YS: I guess the real question has to be this: Is the
heat real?
“OM: The simple facts are as follows. Scientists
experienced in the area of calorimetric measurements
are performing these experiments. Long
periods occur with no heat production, then,
occasionally, periods suddenly occur with apparent
heat production. These scientists become
irate when so-called experts call them charlatans.
The occasions when apparent heat appears seem
to be highly sensitive to the surface conditions of
the palladium and are not reproducible at will.” Instead of answering the question, Hoffman
has flown off on a tangent. The correct
answer is: Yes, because the techniques are
proven and the signal to noise ratio is very
high. Those are the simple facts. Hoffman
ignores them as he launches into an irrelevant
and factually incorrect discussion. It is
true that with some experiments heat is
sporadic and unpredictable, but the simple
answer remains: Yes because calorimeters
measure sporadic heat reliably.
Furthermore, Hoffman fails to say that Pons
and Fleischmann, Patterson, Arata and
many others have good control over the
reaction. They can trigger it at will, and it continues indefinitely at steady, high power
levels with such a large percent excess that
there is no question it is real. Calling it
“apparent heat production ” is like watching
a Boeing 747 take off and then saying
“apparently it is flying.” The conversation
goes on:
“YS: Any phenomenon that is not reproducible at
will is most likely not real.
“OM: People in the San Fernando valley, Japanese,
Colombians, et al., will be glad to hear that earthquakes
are not real.
“YS: Ouch. I deserved that. My comment was stupid.
“OM: A large number of people who should know
better have parroted that inane statement. There
are, however, many artifacts that can indicate a
false period of heat production, as we have discussed.
The question of whether heat is being
produced is still open, though any such heat is
not from deuterium atoms fusing with deuterium
atoms to produce equal amounts of 3He + neutron
and triton + proton. If the heat is real it must
be from a different nuclear reaction or some
totally unknown non-nuclear source of reactions
with energies far above the electron-volt levels of
chemical reactions.”
This is the first and only place in the entire
book where Hoffman faces the truth. But
not for long. The question of whether heat
is being produced is not open. It was
closed, once and for all, back in 1991 when
McKubre and others published their replications
of Pons and Fleischmann. Hoffman
finally makes this key point: the energies
are far about the electron-volt levels of
chemical reactions. It is hundreds of thousands
of times above those levels, in some
cases. Hoffman's statements about “many
artifacts” and the heat “still being open to
question” are false. Calorimetry at the multiple-
watt level is cut-and-dry. It gives an
unambiguous answer that no modern scientist
can doubt or argue with. It is not
complicated; the results are not open to
question; the doubts and questions paraded
by Hoffman and other skeptics have no
scientific merit. The techniques used to
measure watt-level heat are so fundamental,
so easy, and the results so clear, that
for Hoffman and others to question them is
tantamount to questioning all of science
back to James Watt. They might as well
doubt that Newton's prism experiment
proves white light contains the other visible
colors.

Other skeptics have attempted to disprove
the heat results. Hoffman does not.
He does not even dare to mention the actual
numbers from the papers. He is a good
enough scientist to realize that he cannot
challenge them. Instead, he pretends they
do not exist. After coming so close to confronting
the truth, Hoffman's imaginary
dialog fades away in a meandering discussion
of marginal experiments. This is typical
of the whole sad book:
“YS: You were supposed to summarize 'cold
fusion' for me. Your summary has no punch ending!
You agree it is not the normal D-D fusion
that was originally postulated. Does any anomalous
nuclear effect exist or not? I suspect it does
not. You apparently think that the answer is not
in yet. Can you at least point to those experiments
that you think should be continued?”
No scientist, anywhere, has ever postulated
that cold fusion is normal D-D fusion. If it were, I would be dead from radiation. That
is an infuriating straw man argument.
“OM: It's not an exclusive list -- and I'm talking
about anomalous nuclear effects now, not heat.
Obviously, the concrete setting experiments are
interesting. The Los Alamos alternating disks of
palladium and silicon with submicrosecond bursts
of kilovolt charge are most intriguing. The cavitation
experiments, which involve the creation of
enormous pressures as bubbles collapse, seem
worthwhile at this time.”
“YS: Well, if you can't be more definitive on the
reality of anomalous nuclear effects in deuterium/
solid systems, at least you know what needs
to be pursued.
“OM: Is there anything else you'd like to know
about the anomalous nuclear effects in deuterium/
solid systems? . . ”
So . . . the heat drops out of the discussion,
having lasted for only two paragraphs out
of the entire book. Yet heat is the single
most important aspect of cold fusion. It
proves the three great essentials:
1. That cold fusion must exist, because the
calorimetric signal to noise ratio of these
experiments is so high and the techniques
so reliable.
2. That it cannot be a chemical effect.
3. That it may well be the most important
discovery in history, because pollutionfree,
high-density energy is the most vital
resource on earth.
Hoffman sweeps the significance of the
heat under the rug along with all heat
experiments and data. Hoffman and the
other skeptics want to talk about neutrons
and Portland cement. They want to change
the subject. They will never admit the heat
is real, because that proves they have been
drastically wrong from the beginning.
Hoffman, Jones, and other hard-line opponents
would dearly like to put a stop to all
experiments that show excess heat.
Hoffman wants to do Portland cement, he
wants Los Alamos to continue looking for
tritium. Cold fusion is fine as long as it is
not heat. He wants to talk about E-Quest,
but he dares not mention that they observe
hundreds of watts of heat, and he deliberately
leaves out their best helium results
too, in Table 10.1, because he does not
want to lend too much support to any
aspect of cold fusion. The theme of the
book, introduced in the Forward and
repeated throughout is that all cold fusion
results are marginal and probably mistakes.
To prove that contention they censor out
the dramatic successes like E-Quest's helium-
4, even though Hoffman's own lab confirmed
it, and even though it slipped into
Appendix D. Above all, Hoffman and
Schneider avoid giving any support to heat,
no matter how dramatic and clear-cut the
evidence for it is. They pretend that most of
the top cold fusion papers do not exist. Yet
heat is the key to cold fusion, and it is the
key to mankind's long term survival. 

Tanzella, S. Crouch-Baker, T.O. Passell and J. Santucci,
"Isothermal Flow Calorimetric Investigations of the D/Pd
System," The Science of Cold Fusion, Proceedings of the II
Annual Conference on Cold Fusion, Como, Italy, June 29-
July 4, 1991, pp 419-443

2. M.C.H. McKubre, S. Crouch-Baker, A.M. Riley, R.C.
Rocha-Filho, S.I. Smedley, and F.L. Tanzella (SRI
International, Menlo Park, CA, USA), "Excess Power
Production in D2O Electrolysis Cells: a Comparison of
Results from Differing Cell Designs," presented at the
Third International Conference on Cold Fusion, October
21-25, 1992

3. M.C.H. McKubre, B. Bush, S. Crouch-Baker, A. Hauser,
N. Jevtic, T. Passell, S. Smedley, F. Tanzella, M. Williams,
and S. Wing (SRI International, Menlo Park CA, Electric
Power Research Inst., Palo Alto, CA), "Calorimetry Studies
of the D/Pd System," presented at ICCF4

4. M. McKubre et al., "Isothermal flow calorimetric investigations
of the D/Pd and H/Pd systems," J. Electroanal.
Chem., 368 (1994) 55.

5. M.C.H. McKubre (SRI International), Observations of
Heat in Electrochemical Studies of the
Palladium/Deuterium System Employing an Isothermal
Flow Calorimeter.

6. F. Slakey (Science Policy Administrator, American
Physical Society), “When the lights of reason go out,” New
Scientist, Sept. 1993.

7. F. Nakano, “The Reality of Cold Fusion Can No Longer
Be Denied,” Bungei Shunju, Sept. 1991.

8. M. Fleischmann (Univ. Southampton), S. Pons (IMRA
Europe), "Calorimetry of the Pd-D2O system: from simplicity
via complications to simplicity," Physics Letters A,
176 (1993) 118-129

9. Actually, an error of that magnitude would never happen
in the first place. If the instruments were broken or
installed incorrectly to that extent, they would show nothing.
A modern calorimeter uses digital thermometers and
computer data acquisition. With such instruments, a 180
watt error is as unlikely as an error that causes a digital
clock to run two hours fast one day, and two hours slow
the next. When an electronic clock or thermometer breaks
that badly, it stops, goes blank, and shows nothing.

10. M. Cohen et al., Discover Science, (Scott, Foresmann),
pp. 158 - 159. (Note: While the principles described in this
textbook are correct, the experiment as described does
not yield the results shown. The authors are so certain that
calorimetry works, they did not bother to verify that the
particular setup they illustrate will work. I tested it and
found that it does not work.)

11. M. H. Miles, R. A. Hollins (Chem. Div., Research Dept.,
Naval Air Warfare Center, China Lake, California), B. F.
Bush, J. J. Lagowski (Dept. Chem., Univ. of Texas), and R.
R. Miles (Nuc. Safety Dept., EG&G, Colorado), "Correlation
of Excess Power and Helium Production During D2O and
H2O Electrolysis Using Palladium Cathodes," J.
Electroanalytical Chem., vol. 346, nos. 1-2, 1993, pp 99-
117.

12. To recalibrate means to recheck the equipment after a
run and make sure the temperature still rises the same
extent in response to a given input power level.

13. Chun-ching Chien (Chem. Div., Inst. Nuc. Energy Res.,
Taiwan), Dalibor Hodko (on leave from Rudjer Boskovic
Inst., Zagreb, Croatia), Zoran Minevski and John O'M.
Bockris (Chem. Dept., Texas A&M Univ., Texas), "On an
Electrode Producing Massive Quantities of Tritium and
Helium," J. Electroanalytical Chem., vol. 338, 1992, pp
189-212

14. Chun-ching Chien and Theresa Chen Huang (Inst.
Nucl. Energy Res., Chem. Div., Lung-Tan, Taiwan),
"Tritium Production by Electrolysis of Heavy Water," Fusion
Technology, vol. 22, no. 3, 1992, pp 391-394


