INTRODUCTION

This paper reports on work devoted to the development
of an easy-to-perform and widely applicable method for
dispersion measurement of supported Pd. Here we discuss
the problem of the stoichiometry factor (S) of adsorbate–
metal interaction, which is the ratio of the number of atoms
adsorbed on metal surface Nads to the number of exposed
metal atoms Ms:
S D Nads=Ms: [1]
During the past 30 years, the problem of stoichiometry of
adsorbate–adsorbent metal interaction has been the subject
of a number of papers, but until now the problem has not
been fully resolved (nor has the problem of relative stoichiometries
of different adsorbates on a given metal) and
still receives new contributions. Excellent reviews (see, for
example, (1–4)) on the topic are available

Most works have been devoted to Pt, particularly to the
H–Pt interaction, but complete agreement has not been
reached even in this case. Published works on Pd are
much less frequent and almost all are based on the H–Pd
interaction.

In regard to H2, a Hirr/Pds stoichiometric ratioD1 (Hirr
refers to irreversibly adsorbed hydrogen and Pds to surface
Pd atoms) is generally accepted. Most authors simply u Hirr/PdsD1, without any independent confirmation and regardless
of the type of support, sample pretreatment conditions,
adsorption temperature (298–373 K), or pressure
(from 0–0.1 to 0–50 KPa). A few authors (5–8) calculated
Hirr/Pds ratio by H2 adsorption on Pd black with a known
surface area. The resulting stoichiometry is not far from
1 (1.0–1.1 except for (6), which reported a value of about
1.2). In some papers H2 adsorption results are compared
to those obtained by different techniques, mainly TEM
and, to a lesser degree, XRD (6, 9–17). In Fig. 1, available
data of Pd particle size calculated from H2 adsorption,
assuming Hirr/PdsD1, are reported in relation to corresponding
TEM and XRD values. The resulting relationship
(dH2=dTEM,XRDD0.96) strongly supports the accuracy
of the assumed stoichiometry. A more precise assessment
of true stoichiometry by comparison methods is not possible
because rough assumptions are necessary to process
experimental data in order to compare them together (18).
At the same time, Fig. 1 shows that a single datum and even
a whole set of data can diverge significantly from the fitting
straight line, pointing out the effect of experimental
parameters, concerning both sample and analysis, on measured
stoichiometry, as will be discussed later.

The Oirr/Pds stoichiometric ratio, not to mention the
widely investigated Pt, is more open to question. Almost
all authors prefer to compare O2 adsorption data to those
obtained by H2 adsorption, assuming Hirr/PdsD1. If the
available results (6, 9, 10, 13, 19–23) are used to calculate
Oirr/Hirr (i.e., the relative stoichiometry Hirr/Pds–Oirr/Pds),
the most relevant feature is the width of range covered by
obtained values (standard deviation 0.30), which makes the
evaluation of stoichiometry unreliable.

In this paper we report on the application to three different
supported Pd catalysts of different methods (i.e., direct
adsorption and titration) and different adsorbates (i.e.,
H2 and O2). We will show that Hirr/OirrD1 and if, on the
basis of the reviewed literature, we assume Hirr/PdsD1,
then also Oirr/PdsD1. The obtained results are independent
of the method used, but the evaluation of direct adsorption
measurements requires the absence or the knowledge
of residual hydrogen on metal after pretreatment


METHODS

Sample Preparation

Pd/Al2O3 was prepared by impregnating ° -Al2O3 Alcoa
CSS (surface area 122 m2g¡1, pore volume 0.43 cm3g¡1)
with excess solution of Pd chloride and reduced by adding
sodium hypophosphite. After removal of excess solution,
the sample was washed with H2O, dried in air at 390 K for
16 h, and kept in a desiccator. The residual P and Cl concentrations,
as determined by XRF, were 150 and 200 ppm,
respectively. The metal loading was determined by conventional
ICP-AES after dissolution in aqua regia. A concentration
of 0.57 wt% Pd was found. In the following the sample
will be identified as Pd0.57/A.

Pd/SiO2–Al2O3 was prepared by using as carrier silica–
alumina Condea (surface area 348 m2g¡1, pore volume
0.62 cm3g¡1). The preparation method was the same as for
Pd0.57/A, without reducing treatment. The Pd concentration
was found to be 1.75 wt%.This sample will be identified
as Pd1.75/SA.

Pd/SiO2 was prepared following the sol-gel method reported
by Zou and Gonzalez (24). Pd acetylacetonate and
tetraethoxysilane were used as precursors. The gel was
dried at 373 K for 4 h and calcined in air at 473 K for 2 h.
The catalyst obtained was found to contain 1.21 wt% Pd,
and it will be identified as Pd1.21/S

Adsorption Methods

Four types of measurements were made on each sample:
H2 adsorption, O2 adsorption, H2 titration, and O2 titration.
Measurements were made on about 3 g of sample by a
Micromeritics ASAP 2010C device equipped with a turbomolecular pump, which allowed it to attain a vacuum better
than 10¡3 Pa in the sample holder. All the treatments, including
adsorption, were performed with sufficient time to
reach equilibrium. In fact some steps are slow, as pointed
out, for example, in (17) for the adsorption of O2 on Pd
surface. The pretreatment consisted of evacuation at 308 K
for 5 min, evacuation at the pretreatment temperature Tpre
(393 or 673 K) for 60 min, five cycles of reduction with H2
(26 KPa) at Tpre for 15 min followed by evacuation at he
same temperature for 15 min (the last time for 60 min),
and, finally, evacuation at 308 K for 60 min. Direct adsorption
measurements were made withH2 or withO2 at 308 K.
They consisted of the determination of two isotherms in
the 0.75–30 KPa range (about 60 min per point) separated
by an evacuation at the same temperature for 60 min. H2
titration measurements were made in the same way, but the
adsorption was preceded by two cycles of a treatment consisting
of adsorption of O2 at 308 K and 26 KPa for 60 min
followed by evacuation at the same temperature for 60 min.
In the case of O2 titration, after the last H2 treatment, instead
of the evacuation, the temperature was lowered under
H2 to 308 K, and then the sample was evacuated at 308 K
for 60 min. 

Adsorbed volumes were calculated by fitting the linear
portion of each isotherm with a straight line and extrapolating
it to zero pressure: the first isotherm gives the total
adsorbed volume, the second gives the reversibly adsorbed
volume, and their difference gives the irreversibly adsorbed
volume.

Starting from Eq. [1] and stoichiometry factor S, it is possible
to calculate dispersion from adsorbed volume (Vads)
and Pd content of the sample (CPd):
D D Ms=Mtot D Nads=.SMtot/ D KVads=.SCPd/: [2]
If Vads is expressed in cm3 g¡1 sample and CPd in g Pd g¡1
sample, K becomes 0.009494 for diatomic molecules; thus,
D D 0:009494Vads=.SCPd/:


RESULTS AND DISCUSSION


Pd/Al2O3

Measurements have been made on Pd0.57/A samples
reduced at two different temperatures, 393 and 673 K,
and evacuated at the reduction temperature (see Experimental).

The lowest temperature was chosen so as to assure the
complete reduction of Pd eventually reoxidized after reduction
by hypophosphite during the drying at 393 K and,
at the same time, to avoid Pd sintering not only on the
Al2O3-supported sample, but also on Pd supported on other
carriers (for example, active carbon), in order to develop a method having an applicability as wide as possible. The
completion of Pd reduction at a temperature lower than
393 K is reported in published papers (25–27), and, as will
be shown later, no further reduction was observed on our
samples between 393 and 673 K. On the contrary, there is
some disagreement among different published data on Pd
sintering (7, 11, 24, 28–33), particularly on Pd/active carbon
(28, 30–32). Nevertheless, no sintering processes up to 400K
have been proven with certainty, except for bulk Pd (7) and
on very highly dispersed Pd (17). In addition, most authors
report direct observations of sintering only at higher temperature
(11, 17, 24, 28, 31–33). In any case, a reduction and
evacuation temperature of 393 K is much lower than that
required to cause metal sintering on Pd/Al2O3 (11, 33). 

The highest temperature was chosen to allow the removal
by evacuation of almost all the hydrogen present on Pd at
the end of reduction. In fact, according to the literature,
the amount of residual hydrogen depends on the evacuation
temperature, as can easily be seen by a number of publishedTPDmeasurements
(1, 4, 23, 29): a high-temperature
evacuation is required to clean Pd surface from adsorbed
hydrogen (28). According to (6), hydrogen is completely
removed from Pd surface at 573 K, while in conformity
with (5), the residual hydrogen on the Pd surface is 11% at
573 K and less than 3% at 673 K. Thus at 673 K it can be
considered negligible.

In Fig. 2, isotherms obtained on samples evacuated at
393 and 673 K by H2 adsorption (Fig. 2a), O2 adsorption
(Fig. 2b), H2 titration (Fig. 2c), and O2 titration (Fig. 2d)
are reported. The results obtained by back extrapolation to
pressureD0 are reported in Table 1.

According to (3), the following equations can be written:
H2 adsorption: PdsHr C .v ¡ r /H ! PdsHv [4]
O2 adsorption: PdsHr C .z C 0:5r /O ! PdsOz
C0:5rH2O [5] H2 titration: PdsOz C .v C 2z/H ! PdsHv C zH2O [6]
O2 titration: PdsHv C .z C 0:5v/O!PdsOz C 0:5vH2O;
[7]
here i. r is the mean number ofHatoms still adsorbed on each
Pds after the final evacuation, ii. v is themeannumberofHatoms irreversibly adsorbed
on each Pds under analysis conditions, iii. z is the mean number of O atoms irreversibly adsorbed
on each Pds under analysis conditions. Notice that the above equations are written assuming that
v and z are independent of the type of measurement. The
assumptions will be discussed later.

BydefiningHaas the experimentally determinednumber
of hydrogen atoms consumed in reaction [4] per Pd atom;
Oa, Ht, and Ot as the corresponding number of atoms consumed
in Eqs. [5], [6], and [7], respectively; and D as the
metal dispersion, the following system can be written:
Ha D D.v ¡ r / [8]
Oa D D.z C 0:5r / [9]
Ht D D.v C 2z/ [10]
Ot D D.z C 0:5v/: [11]
The system contains four unknowns (D; r; v; z). Unfortunately,
as can be easily verified, only two equations are independent
and D is a multiplying factor of all equations.

As a consequence, direct determination of all parameters
is not possible. Nevertheless, under particular conditions,
the system, or more exactly each couple of independent
equations, allows the determination of important parameters,
namely z=v, r=v, and D. However, also if the system
is redundant, the contemporary use of all equations allows
a cross checking of the reliability of the results and of the
assumptions made, as shown in the next.


Reliability of Measurements

Taking the work of O’Rear et al. (3) as a starting point,
it is possible to define two parameters RH (named Rt in the
quoted paper) and RO:
RH D Ht=.Ha C 2Oa/ [12]
RO D Ot=.0:5Ha C Oa/: [13]
On the basis of Eqs. [8] and [11],
RH D RO D 1: [14]
Checking the validity of Eq. [14] is a very good way to test
both the validity of the above assumptions (i.e., v and z
independent of type of measurement) and the correctness
of the experimental procedure.

The values calculated from our data at both 673 and 393K
are within 2% of unity, as shown in Table 2. This shows that
v and z are really independent of type of measurement in the case of Pd and allows most errors to be excluded from
measurement, thus confirming that the data obtained are
suitable for calculations 

Further proof of the reliability of results can be obtained
by taking into account data on reversible adsorption. These
values should depend almost solely on adsorbate molecule
and on measurement conditions. Then all reversible H2 uptakes
must have the same value, as should the corresponding
values obtained with O2. As shown in Table 1, the maximum
difference among H2 reversible adsorption data is
0.010 cm3g¡1 (4.2% of average value), and that among O2
based data is 0.003 cm3g¡1 (negligible).


Evaluation of z/v


As pointed out above, evacuation at 673 K ensures that
residual hydrogen is negligible; thus assuming rD0 it is possible
to calculate z=v by a suitable combination of equations
[8]–[11]. The results on sample evacuated at 673 K
(Table 3) show that z=v is within3%of unity, which is within
the experimental error of the method. In the following, concerning
Pd0.57/A sample we will assume that z=v D1.

The fact that the hydrogen/oxygen stoichiometric ratio is
close to unity strongly supports the existence of a simple and
well-defined adsorption stoichiometry for both gases on Pd.
However, it must be taken into account that the resulting
relationship z=v D1 is valid only under experimental conditions
used to perform our measurements. Nothing can be
inferred for different conditions. For example, as pointed
out by a few authors (5, 22, 34, 35), irreversible adsorption
of both H2 and O2 changes with adsorption temperature.


Evaluation of r/v

If z=v D1, Eqs. [8]–[11] allow the calculation of residual
hydrogen fraction r=v. After evacuation at 673 K, different
combinations of equations, and thus different combinations
of adsorption methods, give residual hydrogen values between
0 and 6% (average 2%), which is in good agreement
with (5).

In the same way, evaluation of data obtained after evacuation
at 393 K is possible. Also in this case, calculation
with different equations and data gives nearly the same
result: residual hydrogenD83–87% (average 85%). This means that evacuation at 393 K leaves most hydrogen on
Pd surface: thus it is not suitable for direct adsorption measurements.
If evacuation at low temperature is required to
avoid Pd sintering or other sample damaging, only titration
methods can be performed.


Calculation of D


Calculation of dispersion D by Eqs. [3] and [8]–[11] requires
the knowledge of at least one stoichiometric factor.
Here we assume, as already discussed, that Hirr/PdsD1
(v D1) and we have shown that under our conditions
Oirr/HirrD1 (z=v D1), and thus alsoOirr/PdsD1 (zD1). The
fact that the hydrogen/oxygen stoichiometric ratio is close
to unity strongly supports the existence of a simple and welldefined
adsorption stoichiometry for both gases on Pd. If
calculation of D is made by direct adsorption data also r
must be known. In our evaluation we used the two average
obtained values: r=v D0.02 (673 K) and r=v D0.85 (393 K).
The knowledge of all three parameters allows the calculation
of D from different measurements. On the samples
pretreated at 393, D varies from 37.3 to 37.9% (average
37.5%), while on the samples pretreated at 673, D varies
from 35.4 to 36.7% (average 36.0%).

It can be noticed that, at a given evacuation temperature,
all measurements give results which are close to one another
(standard deviation<1%). This means that, at least under
adopted experimental conditions, all methods are suitable
for Pd dispersion measurements.

Dispersion seems to be independent of pretreatment (reduction
and evacuation) temperature. This means that no
sintering occurs between 393 and 673 K on Pd/Al2O3 or,
more precisely, a possible sintering at 673 affects metal dispersion
less than 4% of value measured at 393 K.

constancy
of reversible H2 uptakes (maximum difference 2%
of the average value: see Table 1). The O2 reversible adsorption
is negligible also on this sample. The z=v ratio, i.e.,
the Oirr/Hirr stoichiometric ratio, is again close to unity: the
average value is 1.01 (Table 3).

The residual hydrogen (expressed as r=v ratio) is absent
after evacuation at 673 K, while about 67% of the total
hydrogen remains adsorbed if the evacuation is made at
393 K. This value differs from the value of 85% found for
the Pd0.57/A sample. We have not gone deeper into this
question; we only notice that the Pd dispersions of the two
samples are not the same, suggesting the possibility of a
relationship between capability of Pd to retain adsorbed
hydrogen and different fractions of exposed faces or different
ratio of plane, edge, and corner Pd atoms.

The obtained values confirm that all adsorption and desorption
methods give the same metal dispersion: after evacuation
at 673 K the average value is 26.0% with standard
deviation of 0.4, and after evacuation at 393 K the average
value is 25.0% with standard deviation of 1.2. Moreover,
no sintering occurs between 393 and 673 K: difference in
average values obtained at the two temperatures can be
considered to be within the experimental error.

On the whole, the four tested adsorption and titration
methods give the same results as those obtained for the
Pd0.57/A sample, namely a Oirr/Hirr stoichiometric ratio
close to unity.


Pd/SiO2

The data obtained for the Pd1.21/S sample further support
the results given by the two previously discussed samples.

The results are reliable: the values of RH are close to
unity and those of RO, though a bit low, are still acceptable
(Table 2). However, the z=v value is a bit further from unity
than values obtained for other samples (Table 3: 1.03 instead
of 1.00 and 1.01). In our opinion the difference is not
high enough to call into question the previous conclusions.

The adsorbed hydrogen shows the usual behavior as
regards the evacuation: all the hydrogen is removed at
673 K, while most of it (58%) remains on the sample after evacuation at 393 K. The Pd1.21/S shows the lower retention
capacity of hydrogen among the investigated samples,
though not far from values obtained on Pd1.75/SA sample,
having a similar metal dispersion.

Also in this sample, Pd dispersion does not change with
pretreatment temperature: the difference between the average
values obtained at 673 (minimum 26.9%, maximum
28.5%, average 27.8%) and 393 K (minimum 26.4%, maximum
28.4%, average 27.6%) cannot be considered meaningful.
Finally, the results further confirm that all the adsorption
and titration methods give the same results of metal
dispersion.


CONCLUSIONS

Let us summarize the results presented in this paper, devoted
to the direct comparison of the results of four different
methods:H2 adsorption,O2 adsorption,H2 titration,
and O2 titration. The contemporary use of these methods
allows:

i. the determination of relative stoichiometry Hirr/Pds–
Oirr/Pds (Hirr/OirrD1); since (according to the reviewed literature)
Hirr/PdsD1, also Oirr/PdsD1;

ii. the determination of hydrogen still present on metal
surface after evacuation, which requires high temperature
to be completely removed;

iii. the checking of reliability of the methods (by RH and
RO);

iv. the comparison of dispersion values, obtained by different
methods, that result independent of the method, at
least under our experimental conditions. It is evident that the contemporary use of four different
methods is limited to the development stage of a new application
or when controls on used methods are needed.
Usually one method is enough to measure metal dispersion.
The choice depends on the problem being studied

It is evident that the contemporary use of four different
methods is limited to the development stage of a new application
or when controls on used methods are needed.
Usually one method is enough to measure metal dispersion.
The choice depends on the problem being studied.

DirectH2 adsorption has been preferred by most authors
for almost all metal dispersion measurements because of its
simplicity, of the better knowledge of adsorbate/metal stoichiometry,
and of the availability of a number of data suitable
for comparison in the literature. H2 adsorption is the
most often used technique also in the case of Pd, notwithstanding
that measures have been generally performed
under particular conditions (high temperature and/or low
pressure) to avoid H2 absorption in bulk Pd (2, 4, 5, 7–9,
13–16, 19–23). In this paper, as well as in (23), it has been
shown that the fulfilment of this condition is not strictly
required and, as a result, the method is easy to perform.

Direct O2 adsorption has been used less frequently,
mainly because of the uncertainty of oxygen/metal stoichiometry
(6, 9, 10, 13, 20–22). Our results point out that
Oirr/Pds is close to unity, at least under used experimental
conditions, and thus the method can be used as well
as H2 adsorption. An advantage of O2 compared to H2 is the lower sensitivity of its irreversible uptake to adsorption
temperature (22). In addition, the reversibleO2 adsorption
is negligible (see Table 1 and Ref. (22)), at least on oxide
supports; this makes the method potentially more precise
than that based on H2 adsorption.

The assessment of oxygen/Pds stoichiometry makes methods
based on the titration of preadsorbed molecules, not
often used until now (10, 11, 19–21, 23), suitable for dispersion
measurement. Differences between H2 titration and
O2 titration are similar to those discussed with regard to
correspondent direct adsorption methods.

Titration methods, even if a little more complicated than
those based on direct adsorption, have a wider applicability
(1, 4). For example, they must be adopted whenever

i. low evacuation temperature has to be used to preserve
metal from sintering, and thus adsorbed hydrogen cannot
be completely removed from metal surface;

ii. low adsorption values are foreseen owing to low metal
dispersion or content; as regards direct adsorptions, the
amount of gas consumed in O2 titration is 1.5 times higher,
and in H2 titration it is 3 times higher. Obviously the choice must always be related to characteristics
of the sample under study.

The approach discussed in the paper has a wide applicability.
It is not limited to Pd as metal and to inorganic
oxides as carrier, as we have found, by investigating other
supported metal samples such as Pd/C, Pt/Al2O3, Pt/SiO2,
Pt/C, and so on (36).

