Introduction

The Fleischmann-Pons effect consists of excess heat production in experiments where
palladium cathodes are electrolyzed in heavy water; the amount of energy measured in such
experiments is much too large to be of chemical origin; and energetic particles commensurate
with the energy produced are absent. When first described in 1989, the response of the scientific
community was one of skepticism and disbelief. Early efforts to confirm the effect were largely
unsuccessful, due to a lack of understanding as to what are the critical issues. Subsequent
experimental work in the following years has provided enough confirmations that the effect is at
present held to be real among researchers who work in the area.

There is at present no accepted theoretical explanation for the effect. Since the inception of
nuclear physics in the early 20th century, nuclear reactions have been understood in part through
the concept of local energy and momentum conservation. In an exothermic nuclear reaction, the
net energy produced is expressed in terms of energetic particles. No nuclear reactions are known
in which most of the energy produced goes into other channels.

However, this foundation of nuclear physics is precisely what is challenged in the
Fleischmann-Pons experiment. Hence, the primary theoretical focus, if one accepts that the
energy is of nuclear origin and that commensurate energetic particles are not present, must be on
physical mechanisms that lead to a violation of local energy and momentum conservation (while
conserving overall momentum and energy).


Energy exchange

There is some experimental support for a reaction Q-value of 24 MeV per 4He atom observed
in the gas phase, in experiments where an effort was made to scrub the helium out of the cathode
[1,2]. This directs our attention to mechanisms in which two deuterons (as fuel) combine to make
4He (as ash), where the mass difference (24 MeV) is to be converted to a very large number of
lower energy quanta. Experiments have been reported recently in which cathodes have been
observed to respond to laser beat frequencies at 8 THz and 15 THz (and also 20 THz), which
correspond to the optical phonon band edges of PdD (and also PdH) [3]; these are modes with
zero group velocity. This motivates us to consider optical phonon modes as oscillator modes
involved in the energy exchange process.

The theoretical problem to be addressed, then, is how a large energy (24 MeV) quantum can be
split up efficiently into a very large number of small energy (33 or 62 meV) quanta. We have
studied models in which two-level systems with a large transition energy (representing local
molecular D2 and 4He states at vacancy sites in the PdD lattice) couple to a low energy harmonic
oscillator (representing optical phonon modes with low group velocity). Such models at first
glance appear to be closely related to spin-boson models that appear in the literature in
connection with NMR, cavity QED, and other applications. When a two-level system is coupled
to an oscillator with much lower characteristic energy, then the models predict that energy can be
exchanged between the two systems. For this to occur, the resonance must be very precise, and
the resulting energy exchange rate is very slow. In the end, one would not expect to see more
than about 100 oscillator quanta exchanged for a two-level system quanta, due to the weakness
of the energy exchange effect in the multi-quanta limit.


Figure 1: Two-level systems coupled
to a harmonic oscillator, in a many-
spin spin-boson model.

However, if we examine the many-spin version of the spin-boson problem, we find that energy
exchange is hindered by destructive interference effects between the different individual
pathways involved. If this destructive interference is spoiled, then the rate of energy exchange is
greatly enhanced, and the number of oscillator quanta that can be exchanged with a two-level
system is increased dramatically. Spin-boson models augmented with loss exhibit greatly
increased energy exchange rates. An example of this is discussed in the Appendix. Such models
allow energy exchange between low energy oscillators and energetic two-level systems that is
sufficiently rapid to account for the kind of energy exchange required in Fleischmann-Pons
experiments, at least in principle.


Excitation transfer

The use of spin-boson models requires an estimate for the coupling matrix elements between
the two-level system and the oscillator. To apply this kind of model to describe nuclear
transitions involving phonon exchange, we require an estimate for the associated matrix element.
There is no difficulty in principle with a direct computation of the matrix element between
molecular D2 and nuclear 4He states in the lattice, including phonon exchange [4]. However, we
know that this matrix element is small due to the presence of a Gamow factor associated with
tunneling through the Coulomb barrier. Many-spin spin-boson models augmented with loss
require the coupling to be strong in order for the energy exchange process described above to
function. As a result, the simplest possible models for energy exchange cannot work in the case
of direct transitions between D2 and 4He.

Consequently, we seek a modification of this basic model. In recent years we have focused on
models involving two different sets of two-level systems, both coupled to a common oscillator.
One of these sets of two-level systems is strongly coupled to the oscillator, and the other is
assumed to be weakly coupled to the oscillator. The basic idea in this kind of model is that the
excitation associated with the weakly-coupled two-level systems is transferred over to the
strongly-coupled two-level systems, where many-quantum energy exchange can occur [5]. This
is indicated schematically in Figure 2.


Figure 2:
The
D2/4He
system (modeled as a set
of
equivalent
two-level
systems) is weakly coupled
to a low energy oscillator.
A second set of two-level
systems (indicated as the
receiver
system)
is
strongly
coupled
to
the
oscillator.

Computations done to date indicates that the basic scheme seems up to the task of modeling
the Fleischmann-Pons excess heat effect, as long as the associated many-spin model is
augmented with loss (which greatly accelerates the excitation transfer process as well as the
energy exchange process). The enhanced excitation transfer rate is sufficiently fast in the case of
the weak coupling matrix element associated with the D2-4He transition to be consistent with
experiment (as long as substantial screening effects comparable to those estimated by Cserki and
coworkers [6] for PdD are included).

However, input from experiment does not tell us what the relevant physical states are that
correspond to the strongly-coupled two-level system on the receiver side. There are at least two
plausible candidates which seem to have theoretical support and are not inconsistent with
experiment:
One possibility is that nuclear states of the host lattice participate. In this case, the ground state
of the two-level system would correspond to the ground state of neutron rich isotopes of the host
(such as 110Pd). The upper state would correspond to an exotic nuclear state in which a neutral
cluster (such as 4n) separated from the daughter nucleus (106Pd) by about 10 fm, perhaps with
some angular momentum. Such a state would be favored by the selection rules associated with
coupling to the lattice (phonon exchange in association with nuclear excitation in general seems
to be a weak effect, that becomes much stronger in the event that the lattice “sees” a mass change
of the nucleus). Whether this kind of state can be sufficiently stable to do what is required within
the context of the model has not been demonstrated.

Another possibility is that nuclear states similar to those of the D2-4He two-level systems
participate. In this case, the 4He ground state would match the ground state of the receiver-side
two-level systems. The excited state in this scenario would be a compact molecular D2 state,
formed by a competition between production (where the source involves creation at fermi-level
separation) and destruction (where transitions back down to the ground state occur sufficiently
rapidly to prevent D2 separation out to 0.74 Angstroms). As long as the reduced D2 separation
was sufficiently large so that the difference in the electronic wavefunctions is significant
(ultimately leading to phonon exchange), and conventional fusion pathways occurred sufficiently
slowly so as not to drain off the excitation, then such a state would be able to fulfill the
functional requirements of the model.


Simulation model

The development of an idealized microscopic model for excitation transfer and energy
exchange allows us to consider using it in the context of a simulation model. A picture has been
in the process of emerging over a great many years which seems to be consistent with many
experiments, and which seems to be consistent with the requirements of the microscopic model.

In this picture, deuterium is loaded into Pd so that the associated chemical potential becomes
high enough to support vacancy stabilization (which occurs near a D/Pd ratio of 0.94). At this
loading, Pd that is codeposited will have a large number of single-atom vacancies. There is the
possibility that vacancies can diffuse from the outer surface, but the associated kinetics are
expected to be slow unless there exists an enhancement under conditions where a deuterium flux
is present. In the basic Fleischmann-Pons experiment, the formation of the vacancies is thought
to require about a month (and a much shorter time in the Szpak experiment). The loading and
vacancy stabilization can be simulated from information available in the literature; to model the
surface vacancy distribution requires knowledge of the rate of codeposition, or enhanced
vacancy diffusion rates.

We conjecture that -bonded dideuterium [7] (essentially molecular D2) forms in the vacancies
at more modest loadings. These are the active sites, which occur in the outer (micron-scale)
region of the cathode. Dideuterium formation can be modeled using simple statistical mechanics
given an estimate of the binding energy. Excitation transfer is then stimulated by phonon
exchange with compressional phonon modes (the matrix element between D2 and 4He couples
predominantly to compressional phonon modes) that are highly excited. Phonon excitation in this
picture is produced by the deuterium flux through the near-surface of the cathode. Energy
exchange occurs in the presence of high compressional optical phonon excitation in the case of
assumed 4He-compact D2 states (which at present seems to match experiment best). The
simplified model described above consisting of two-sets of two-level systems to account for the
nuclear states, and a harmonic oscillator (augmented with loss) to model optical phonon modes,
can be used to develop equations describing the associated coherent dynamics for the simulation
model.

As energy is produced, 4He accumulates in the active sites. At first, this would be helpful as
there would be more capacity for anomalous energy exchange, since in general there is little
helium present initially. However, as more energy is produced, we expect helium to block active
sites, since the diffusion of helium away from the active sites is very slow near room
temperature. In the event that helium diffusion limits excess heat production, we would expect to
see a strong temperature dependence associated with excess heat production (as has been
reported in a number of experiments [8]). With an appropriate simulation model, we can model
this effect, and compute the fraction of helium released into the gas.

We have begun the development of the simulation model outlined above. The results obtained
so far seem to be interesting, and we hope to compare our results with experiment in the coming
months.


Appendix

Consider the enhancement of multi-quantum coherent energy exchange in a many-spin spin-
boson model augmented with loss. We take the Hamiltonian to be of the form
Where the first term in the Hamiltonian describes the energy of the two-level systems, the second
term describes the oscillator, the third term implements linear coupling, and the final term
accounts for the loss added to the model. The model is discussed further in [9].

Figure 3: Energy levels that
contribute to indirect coupling
between |M,n and |M+1,n-5
in the case of multi-quantum
exchange involving 5 quanta.

The impact of loss on energy exchange can be illustrated through a concrete example. We
consider a finite basis solution constructed from a combination of 12 basis states composed
individually of products of Dicke states and oscillator states

We consider indirect coupling from an initial state |M,n to a final state |M+1,n-5, in which a
single two-level system excitation is matched to a loss of 5 oscillator quanta. The states are
illustrated in Figure 3.

If no loss is present, the indirect matrix element between the initial state and the final state can
be found to lowest-order in perturbation theory to be

If loss is present and large for all intermediate states with a basis energy less than E, such that the
associated paths do not contribute, then the indirect coupling matrix element is

For modest S the enhancement in indirect coupling is orders of magnitude. Loss breaks the
destructive interference between the contributions from different pathways, and results in a
dramatic increase in the indirect coupling responsible for coherent multi-quantum energy
exchange.


References

1. M. C. H. McKubre et al, as discussed in the report prepared for the 2004 DoE review; Proc.
ICCF11, page 23 (2004).
2. M. Apicella et al, Proc. ICCF12 page 117 (2005).
3. D. Letts and P. L. Hagelstein, Proc. ICCF14 (2008).
4. P. L. Hagelstein, I. U. Chaudhary et al, Proc. ICCF14 (2008).
5. P. L. Hagelstein and I. U. Chaudhary, J. Phys. B, 41 135501 (2008).
6. K. Czerski, A. Huke, P. Heide, and G. Ruprecht, Europhys. Lett. 68 363 (2004).
7. G. Kubas, Metal dihydrogen and -bond complexes, Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers,
New York (2001).
8. E. Storms, Proc. ICCF4, vol 2, page 4-1 (1993).
9. P. L. Hagelstein and I. U. Chaudhary, submitted (2008).
