Introduction

Claims of observations of anomalies in metal deuteride and metal hydride systems
continue to be reported. These anomalies include the production of excess heat, tritium,
helium, neutrons, MeV charged particles, x-rays, gamma rays, and induced radioactivity.
To account for any of these anomalies, we require that there exists some route for a large
quantum of energy to be transferred from the local microscopic scale of atoms and nuclei
to the macroscopic scale of the surrounding lattice. As a prototypical example of this,
we consider the initial Pons-Fleischmann conjecture that
may account for excess heat production. From our point of view, the experimental
evidence in support of this is suggestive but by no means conclusive. Our focus here is
on the theoretical aspects of this kind of conjecture.

If the energy from the d + d reaction could go into a single highly excited phonon
mode directly with some efficiency, then the overall reaction would be Dicke enhanced
( this was observed and presented by the author in April 1989; the possibility of Dicke
enhanced fusion reactions is also a key part of Preparatta's theories). Assuming that the
reaction were mediated by the strong force, the ratio of the rate of such a Dicke enhanced
reaction to an incoherent channel such as the neutron branch would be
where T/ is the efficiency of the coupling to the lattice ( as measured against the kinematic
coupling associated with incoherent neutron production), and where N Dicke is essentially
the number of reacting pairs that communicate with the highly excited phonon mode. 
Within such a scenario, there is no branching ratio problem, and there is no longer any 
need for an enhanced tunneling effect. In the experimental claims, the observed heat to 
neutron ratios are consistent with Dicke numbers in excess of 1014. 

Interestingly enough, we conclude that the major outstanding theoretical problem is 
not how to elude the Coulomb barrier; and it is not how to account for anomalously low 
neutron emission rates. The big issue is, and always has been, whether a large energy 
quantum can be transferred efficiently from a nuclear reaction to new degrees of freedom 
associated with the surrounding environment. This is true not just for heat production, 
but also for tritium production, gamma emission, charged particle emission, and induced 
radioactivity. Consequently, our interest must be focussed on the problem of anomalous 
energy transfer. 


Coupling between the Microscopic and Macroscopic 

We wish to transfer a large energy quantum from the microscopic (atomic or nuclear) 
level to the macroscopic (lattice) level. There is an issue as to what macroscopic degree of 
freedom to couple to, as there are electronic, vibrational and electromagnetic degrees of 
freedom. From our perspective, the coupling to the electric or electromagnetic degrees of 
freedom is weak at best, and so we prefer phononic degrees of freedom. For the discussion 
that follows, we imagine optical phonon modes, although high frequency acoustic modes 
may also be relevant. 

Intimate coupling between phonons and nuclei has not really been addressed previ­
ously, although weak coupling between the two systems is well known (NMR lineshape 
studies and nuclear acoustic resonance studies are relevant in this regard). We have re­
cently proposed the use of a hybrid scheme to analyze local dynamics in a lattice with a 
strongly excited phonon mode. This hybrid scheme is implemented using lattice position 
operators 

The phonon mode amplitude here is (j, and the effects of all of the other phonon mode 
amplitudes are combined into Rj. We refer to this operator as a residual position opera­
tor, which differs from the position operator on the LHS only in that it does not include 
the contribution of the single highly excited mode. 

This formulation allows us to address systematically a variety of quantum problems 
in which one or more atoms or nuclei interact in the presence of a strong phonon field. 
For example, strong excitation of a high-k optical longitudinal mode will act to bring 
interstitial deuterons more closely together, which provides a handle for interactions 
between the nuclei and the phonon mode. One interesting problem that immediately 
presents itself is the effect of such a highly excited phonon mode on the fusion rate 
within the lattice. A Born-Oppenheimer type approximation 
is appropriate, as the mass associated with the phonon mode is many times the mass of 
a single atom or nuclei. We can study the effect of phonon excitation on the atom-atom 
overlap probability by solving the two-body Schrodinger equation 

As the phonon excitation brings the atoms on average closer together, the atom-atom 
overlap increases. As the phonon excitation moves the atoms on average further apart, the 
atom-atom interaction decreases. This dependence of the close range nuclear interaction 
on the phonon coordinate provides a basic coupling mechanism that is a prerequisite for 
a possible anomalous energy transfer effect. Work is in progress seeking solutions to this 
equation. 


There is no first order anomalous energy transfer effect 

We can use the hybrid description described briefly above to examine whether energy 
can be transferred from the nucleus to the lattice under various assumptions. The sim­
plest possible mechanism through which an energy transfer effect might operate is direct 
first order coupling, mediated by the strong force. One example of this is to couple the 
dd-fusion energy directly to the lattice. We consider a highly excited lattice in which
the lattice excitation energy exceeds the nuclear binding energy by whatever factor is
required, and then calculate rates according to Fermi's Golden rule
where V represents the strong force interaction. The results are that the associated 
reaction rate is very small, and we conclude that the lattice phonon mode is not able 
to accept a large quantum through a first order interaction. The difficulty in conserving 
energy and matching momentum at the same time lies at the heart of why first order 
coupling doesn't work in this case. A large .6.E is to be transferred, but the corresponding 
.6.p that can be coupled to the lattice is not commensurate. 

We can develop some intuition as to what the underlying physical issue is by con­
sidering a highly idealized version of the problem. The essential difficulty with a first 
order anomalous energy transfer effect can be visualized in terms of a classical analog 
in a reduced dimension space as illustrated in Figure 1. The axis associated with the 
phonon amplitude is labeled q; in the absence of the nuclear interaction, the potential in 
q is parabolic corresponding to an underlying harmonic lattice model. There are a very 
large number of other axes, corresponding to the different mode amplitudes. The only 
important variable contributed by all of these other modes in this problem is the relative 
separation, which we have indicated schematically as a residual relative separation axis, 
denoted by .6.r. Where the two nuclei come together in residual space is determined by 
the mode amplitude; at zero phonon amplitude the two nuclei are normally far apart, 
and at large phonon amplitude they are somewhat closer together. When deuterons ap­
proach, there is an attractive nuclear potential and a repulsive Coulombic potential, both 
of which are represented in the figure. 

The dynamical problem of anomalous energy in this example is analogous to the 
classical problem of launching a frictionless particle up the parabolic slope, and arranging 
for it to come back down in the slot. For a very narrow and deep slot, there is just no 
way to do it [we would need the particle to bounce off of some other potential in order to 
scatter into the slot - however, no other potential appears in this idealized model]. That 
this is so can be seen by considering microscopic reversibility. A particle launched within 
a deep slot is not going to come out on account of the relatively weak force associated 
with the parabolic potential. 

Figure l: Schematic of classical lattice-nuclei dynamics. 

The extension of this basic argument to higher dimensions does not solve the essential 
problem. Replacing the classical problem by the equivalent quantum problem, which 
introduces a tunneling effect, also does nothing to fix the problem. A nonlinearity in 
the phonon mode potential, which is known for PdD, also is not helpful. We conclude 
that anomalous energy transfer to a single phonon mode by first order coupling simply 
doesn't work. Extending the argument to the case of several phonon modes does not 
change this conclusion. 


Discussion 

The basic problem with a first order anomalous energy transfer effect for a fusion 
process is that the energy quantum t::.E is extremely large, but the coupling is relatively 
low order in q. For example, suppose that the coupling to the phonons were first order. 

The lattice can respond in this case at ±wo ( where wo is the resonant frequency, a 
few 10s of meV), with some additional spread in frequency due to damping. If the 
lattice response off resonance by several Me V away were finite, then we would have 
reason to expect a first order transition. However, phonon-phonon coupling and phonon­
electron coupling processes dominate the damping of the phonon mode, and the frequency 
response associated with these mechanisms is at the sub-e V level. 

A higher order initial interaction certainly helps in this regard. For example, a fusion 
. reaction coupled to a highly excited phonon mode could in principle couple exchang­
ing 100 phonons. The lattice response would then occur at a correspondingly higher 
frequency, and damping would induce a larger spread in the linewidth. Nevertheless, 
the broadening due to phonon-phonon and electron-phonon coupling is still relatively 
small on a per phonon basis. Consequently, even strongly nonlinear coupling with the 
associated broadening effects, is not able to do the job. 

What we need in this context is some dissipative mechanism that transfers a large 
quantum with an associated low order coupling to the excited phonon mode. The conven­
tional dissipative mechanisms of course do not work this way, but that does not address 
the more interesting question as to whether there exist unconventional dissipation chan­
nels with this property. Our initial difficulties arise because in coupling a fusion reaction 
to a lattice phonon mode, the interaction involves large b..E with a noncommensurate 
smaller b..p. Perhaps there exist other dissipative processes with similar characteristics. 
For example, there are endothermic processes with low order phonon couplings and with 
large b..E, such as alpha decay or recoil. If these processes are included, then the lattice 
will exhibit high frequency fluctuations associated with low order matrix elements. In 
this case, one would expect to see anomalous energy transfer effects. 


Anomalous energy transfer with second order process 

The discussion of the preceding section provides the key to what is required for models 
that address anomalous energy transfer. A fusion reaction coupled to a highly excited 
phonon mode that has very high frequency fluctuations can go. However, since the 
requisite high frequency fluctuations have not been studied previously. we must include 
them explicitly in our model. We then propose a second order model in order to describe 
a first order anomalous energy transfer effect in the presence of anomalous fluctuations. 
In this section, we outline the model; detailed computations are in progress. 

Such a second order theory can be based on Fermi's Golden rule in the form 
where Va might be the strong force interaction relevant to an exothermic fusion event, 
and where ½ might be the Coulomb interaction relevant to an endothermic recoil event. 

In light of our discussion above concerning fluctuations, we might also develop a 
"lineshape" type of theory, based on using a rotation to replace the first order dissipative 
coupling with an approximate second order "damping" term 
In this case, we obtain a theory for reaction rates that is written in terms of an anomalous 
In this case, the new dissipative terms appear explicitly as an anomalous line broadening 
effect. 


Overview of the new theory 

We have specified in the previous sections a new second order theory for anomalous 
energy transfer. It remains to evaluate reaction rates for specific processes to understand 
the predictions of the model; work is currently in progress to do exactly this. However, 
certain features of the theory are apparent and deserve comment. 

Within the model, a highly excited phonon mode results in a coupling between an 
exothermic reaction at one site, and one or more endothermic reactions at other sites. 
There are three exothermic channels that appear to be most relevant: d + p -3 He, 
d+d ---+ 4 He, and d+d ---+ t+ p. In all cases, the leading order microscopic interaction is 
a strong force E2 phonon-nuclear coupling, where the notion of phonon-nuclear coupling 
as used here is introduced earlier in this work. As the t + p channel must result in nearly 
stationary protons and tritons, the final state channel is S-wave, which requires strong 
force E2 coupling as the lowest order relevant interaction. There is no intermediate fusion 
gamma production anywhere in this model. 

The endothermic channels that are relevant (in the sense that they can dissipate a 
large t::..E with a small phononic t::..p) include Coulomb-mediated alpha decay, neutron or 
proton ejection, beta decay and atom-atom recoil processes ( other channels are possible, 
but these appear to be the most relevant for the field). These processes can be accompa­
nied by x-ray or gamma emission, and in some cases by either the creation or destruction 
of radioactive species. 

The model gives naturally Dicke superradiant enhancement factors for reactions that 
couple to the same excited phonon mode. Optical longitudinal phonon modes with 
high k have the strongest phonon-nuclear coupling, but non-trivial coupling exists for 
other modes. We know that the relevant optical modes are strongly damped, so that 
it is impossible to obtain Dicke factors on the order of 1014 in the absence of a gain 
mechanism for the phonons. The new model is capable of providing phonon gain at low 
levels, since a small fraction of the anomalous energy can be accepted by the phonon 
mode. Such a mechanism is critical for addressing excess heat production within the 
theoretical framework. 


Limitations due to the uncertainty principle 

Other issues are also of interest. One would expect that attempts to transfer a 
large quantum of energy from one site to another might be exponentially damped. This 
issue is often phrased in terms of a Heisenberg uncertainty argument: for a continuous 
distribution of energy eigenstates, an energy transfer of t::..E is associated with a time 
increment t
Speed of light limitations then produces an upper limit of distance to which the energy 
can be transferred 
This argument is often given as effectively ruling out all theories that attempt to describe 
a coupling of a large energy quantum (such as from a nuclear reaction) to the surrounding 
environment. The basic argument is that there is not enough time available for the energy 
to be transferred even to the nearest atom, much less to a delocalized mode. 

The new model appears to be consistent with this, as long as we are careful to use 
the relevant configuration space. The underlying hybrid lattice description is given in 
terms of phonon mode amplitudes and residual position vectors. In this case, the relevant 
spatial distance for the uncertainty principle argument is in the configuration space of 
the excited phonon mode, and we require that 
The phonon mode amplitude cannot change by very much between the exothermic and 
endothermic parts of the overall process. The same phonon mode interacts with local 
systems at different sites, so that the overall interaction is real space is nonlocal. 

This does not address the more interesting question of the conditions under which the 
hybrid description of phonon mode plus residual position operators is appropriate. For 
example, we would expect exponential damping of these effects to occur in the thermal 
limit, due to destructive interference between the different modes. We might expect 
that as the phonon mode amplitude increases, the importance of the phonon mode as a 
quantum system increases in the problem. At some highly elevated level of excitation, 
we might expect that the lattice would be able to facilitate the transfer of an anomalous 
energy quantum. This issue is a very important one for further study. 


Energetic protons 

Kasagi reported at ICCF6 the observation of energetic protons in accelerator experi­
ments in which deuterons bombarded a metal deuteride sample. This effect is conjectured 
to be due to a three-body ddd-fusion reaction. The probability that two deuterons are 
sufficiently close in the lattice to give rise to such a large yield is many orders of magni­
tude too low (in the absence of other new physics) to be consistent with the experimental 
observations. Consequently, we offer here a speculation based on the model described 
above. 

If we assume that in these experiments that somehow a phonon mode is sufficiently 
highly excited to allow anomalous energy transfer, then it may follow that a small frac­
tion of the time the lattice can transfer energy from an energetic dd-fusion event. The 
probability of this will likely depend on the momentum of the bound deuteron due to 
the lattice excitation compared to the relative momentum between the two deuterons. 
The predominant dissipation mechanism that would involve energetic protons within this 
model would be ejection of protons from the host metal nuclei mediated by the Coulomb 
interaction between the bound proton and nearby nuclei. Such a mechanism, if correct, 
would be observable in noncommensurate mean neutron and proton energies, in a depen­
dence of the mean energy on host metal, and on secondary gamma emission. This may 
provide a route to clarify basic anomalous energy transfer mechanisms experimentally. 


Atomic Recoil 

Atomic recoil is proposed as an important dissipation mechanism for the second order 
model discussed above. Energy transfer to a single atomic recoil event would require 
Me V charged particles in large quantity associated with heat production, and this is 
not consistent with the experimental claims. We speculate here that there exists within 
the theory pathways in which multiple recoil events occur at lower energy as well. The 
motivation for this is that the longitudinal phonon modes that are effective in bringing 
deuterons close together to fuse are the same modes that can bring them together to 
scatter. 

We are considering that for excess heat production the predominant dissipation mech­
anism is low energy recoil of a large number of deuterons from each other. Mathematical 
details of this model in terms of relevant collective coordinates will appear later on else­
where. The ability of a lattice to dissipate energy through such a mechanism will be a 
strong function of the size of the phonon mode; larger modes will have access to lower 
average energy recoils. 
