EPRI TR-104195, Research Project 3170-01, Final
Report, August 1994, 128 pages, plus 342 pages on
microfiche. 
Review by Jed Rothwell


Comprehensive, Meticulous and Definitive

This is one of the most comprehensive descriptions of a set of cold fusion experiments ever
published. The only reports I know of that rival it are from F.G. Will et al.,1,2 and M. H. Miles et
al.3 This EPRI book describes the research paid for by EPRI and performed at SRI International
between 1989 and 1994 by M. McKubre, S. Crouch-Baker, F. Tanzella and eight other principal
investigators. These are among the most careful cold fusion experiments ever done. The results
are unequivocal. They were first described in 1991, and summarized in McKubre’s 1992 lecture
notice at MIT:
Unaccounted, and statistically significant heat excesses have been observed on more than
40 occasions. The excess energies of these observations are larger than can be accounted
for by known chemical or mechanical energy storage processes. Observations of excess
power and energy are strongly correlated with the measured D/Pd ratio, to the imposed
cathodic current density, and to a third process of unknown origin, with an extended time
constant.

There is no room for doubt about these results. They are far above noise levels and potential
errors, which were established with almost fanatical precision. (See the sidebar “Fifty Sigma
Results.”) Figure 1 shows an example in which total uncertainty from noise and potential errors
was established at less than 0.1 watts, total electrolysis input (not shown here) was ten watts, and
the excess ranged from 0.9 to 1.0 watts for 192 hours (8 days). While this is ‘only’ 10% excess,
the Uncertainty line is far below Excess Power. This was established with exhaustive procedures
described in detail in the text. For example, inlet and outlet temperatures were measured with
two thermocouples at the inlet, and two at the outlet, with an accuracy of ± 0.001K. Here is how
the flow rate was maintained and measured in experiments P12 through P16:
The heat transfer fluid was pumped from the bath and past the cell inside the calorimeter
volume by Fluid Metering, Inc. (Oyster Bay, NY), mode QV-OSSY constant
displacement pumps. The mass flow rate was determined by pumping the flow to an
auto-siphon device placed on a Setra model 5000L digital balance. Precautions were
taken to ensure that fluid was not lost following its transit through the cell and before
flow rate determination.

This method allows accuracy of better than 0.01%; that is, 200 ± 0.01g per 240 ± 0.01 seconds.

In a number of experiments rotometers were also employed.

Great effort was devoted to quantifying and reducing already-small errors, like the heat loss from
conduction of the electrode and thermocouple lead wires going into the cell. Most workers
ignore such factors because they are so small compared to the excess heat.

SRI has an interesting approach to doing control or blank experiments, in addition to the usual
use of platinum electrodes:
In general, two different experiments were performed simultaneously in the same bath
the electrochemical cells were connected electrically in series, but the calorimetric
systems were hydraulically in parallel. Separate pumps were provided for each
calorimeter, and the flows from the two cells were multiplexed to a single mass balance.

All measurements were multiplexed to a single multimeter that was periodically
interchanged with another precalibrated meter. In this way, one series cell effectively
acted as a standard for the other: if Pexcess was observed not to be zero in one cell while it
was zero in another, this difference was unlikely to be an artifact due to current source of
voltmeter miscalibration. Further, the current-measuring resistors were interchanged,
replaced, and removed and recalibrated during periods of excess power production, a
procedure that reduced the likelihood that errors were associated with the measurement
of current.

These details give you a sense of how much effort went into the experiments.

The tone of the writing is conservative, emphasizing how much we do not know. It is painfully
honest in places. Difficulties and equipment failures are described in detail. You get a sense you
are watching over someone’s shoulder in the lab, or leafing through a lab notebook. The authors
take nothing for granted. Most people simply state the cold fusion reaction must be beyond
chemistry because it produces so much heat from such a small mass. In this book they
quantitatively prove that assertion, by listing an inventory of chemicals in the cell, every possible
chemical reaction, and the mass of all reactants in the cell. (See sidebar “Overkill Example.)
They compute total joules from the reactants and show that only 2 to 3% of the excess heat could
have come from chemistry. This is overkill; it is proving the obvious in meticulous detail. It
seems a little silly. But it is good to see the authors bulldoze away all possible arguments.

When the authors do not have definitive evidence for something, and they extrapolate, they
always say so:
At very high fugacities . . . a distinct change in the slopes of the resistance/fugacity
curves is apparent. This change of slope has been interpreted in terms of the occupation
of tetrahedral sites at very high loadings. Firm crystallographic evidence, which has not
yet been obtained, is required to substantiate this interpretation. [p. 2-8]
So much care has been taken, and so many doubts have been expressed and then laid to rest, that
when they finally get around to making definitive claims you feel they must be on solid ground.


A Triumph, Yet Flawed

In spite the overall technical excellence of this work, it is flawed, for several reasons:
Since 1989 SRI has made little progress. The cells do not produce more excess heat.
Reliability and reproducibility have not improved. SRI is no closer to practical
technology than they were in 1989. They do not appear to have made much progress
solving the scientific problems either.
SRI has been slow to try new techniques and materials like nickel or thin film and wire
palladium. They have used bulk palladium and heavy water almost exclusively. (They
tested loading with wire palladium.)
These results are definitive, but they are not as dramatic as the boil-off experiments
reported by Pons and Fleischmann in 1993.4
The calorimeter has taken so many resources that other aspects of the research, like
material sciences, have apparently been shortchanged.
C
In a sense, the calorimeter is too good. It is finicky, and difficult to use. It takes a great
deal of effort to set up an experiment with it. This does not encourage a spur-of-the-
moment test of a new idea. A scientist who once worked with the calorimeter calls it “the
great white elephant.” The complexity precludes many interesting experiments. For
example, in about five minutes, Storms can turn off an experiment, open up his
calorimeter, remove the cathode, weigh it and test it in various ways before it degases
significantly or changes in other ways. Some spots in the cathode may even still be
reacting after ten minutes, in heat-after-death reaction. Removing the cathode from the
complex SRI calorimeter take an hour or more. By the time the cathode can be placed on
a scale or in a detection instrument, its composition and properties may change
drastically. Any lingering heat-after-death reactions will surely stop.

C
As McKubre said in his closing remarks at ICCF6, this calorimeter is designed to
maintain a steady state, yet most people think it is essential to jolt the cold fusion cell
with rapidly changing conditions. 5 McKubre now questions whether this was a “wise”
choice of designs. Other scientists expressed these doubts years ago.

C
After the tragic, fatal accident in 1992, the laboratory was arranged with the calorimeter
and all instruments in a locked area surrounded by bulletproof glass. During an
experimental run, the workers are not allowed to go near the experiment. Scientists from
outside of SRI have told me this is impossibly restrictive. Hands-on contact with the
instruments is vital.

Some other cold fusion scientists express dissatisfaction and resentment toward SRI. They feel
that with all of the resources and talent at SRI, more progress should have been made. They say
the research has been misguided, the wrong goals have been set, mistakes like the calorimeter
design have been left in place too long. The calorimeter should have been simplified and
changed to allow rapid changes. New, more innovative techniques and materials like nickel
should have been tried. More attention should have been paid to materials, techniques, and the
operating temperature, and less to improving the calorimetry.

Edmund Storms described the root of the problem. He thinks that SRI’s research has been too
much influenced by the opposition. Skeptical doubts and objections should not be ignored, but 
they should not be elevated to become the overwhelming design criteria for the experiment.

Storms warns of “falling into the tarpit of other people’s expectations” in “a research agenda
driven by skeptics.” The skeptics claimed that extreme precision is needed to prove the cold
fusion effect exists. In fact, says Storms, such precision is not needed, and it adds no statistically
meaningful confidence to the data. Fifty sigma results are not “more convincing” than 25 sigma
ones. He feels that McKubre went too far when he did things like track heat losses via the
thermocouple leads. He also believes that it is better to boost the signal by improving cathode
materials than it is to relentlessly reduce the noise the way SRI has done. McKubre, upon
hearing Storms’ comments, protested that they have been trying to do both. It is a question of
emphasis, and deciding which should be given a higher priority. Storms and I lean toward
boosting the signal. McKubre has not sufficiently explored the kinds of techniques Storms
describes. (Or if he has explored them, he did not describe the work here.) In the end, at ICCF6,
McKubre agreed that the concerns of the skeptics may have interfered with good experiment
design. He said:
What we have done in part, partly in response to our critics, is to make calorimeters in
such a way as to improve the data quality.  You improve the data quality by averaging
things for a long time, never changing anything . . . In doing that, of course, you maintain
the system as closely as possible in a steady state. We have engineered and designed our
systems to do that. That is what flow calorimeters do well. I question, now, whether that
is wise. 5


The Establishment Not Convinced

The biggest problem with the SRI results is that they have not convinced the wider scientific
community and the scientific establishment that cold fusion is real and important. This, of
course, is establishment’s fault, not SRI’s. These results were duly published in major, peer
reviewed scientific journals long ago.6 The work was described in articles in the Wall Street
Journal, on ABC, National Public Radio, and in lectures at MIT, at the International
Conferences, and elsewhere. The establishment should have taken notice years ago. But it did
not. To say the least, this calls into question the traditional model of scientific progress.

EPRI and SRI have followed the rules. They have done what scientists are supposed to do: they
published impeccable, utterly convincing research in top-ranking, peer-reviewed journals. Then
they stood quietly aside, politely waiting for applause and recognition. The applause never came,
and by now it is obvious that it never will come. McKubre feels that cold fusion will only attract
attention when it can be demonstrated as a viable technology. He regrets that he has not been
able to do that. In June 1996, during an interview on National Public Radio, he said:
People’s attention needs to be grabbed by something that’s simple, unarguable, concrete
and rugged, and it has to be simple enough to explain it to the average person or average
politician. And it really has to be a lot more robust than anything that we have generated
so far.

He is right. We probably do need simple and rugged machines. That is a shame and it is unfair to
McKubre and other cold fusion scientists. McKubre’s experiment is unarguable.  It should not
have to be simple, concrete or rugged. These have never been held as standards for believability
in science. Things like the Fermilab top quark machine and hot fusion reactors are as far from
being “simple and rugged” as anything can be.

SRI could have done more to convince the public with what they have already. Neither SRI nor
EPRI has made efforts to publicize the result beyond the usual methods of publishing in
technical journals and lecturing at conferences. They have not held press conferences, or gone
out of their way to attract media attention. They have made no effort to “explain it to the average
person or average politician.” SRI’s scientific papers are models of clarity and good expository
writing, but they are challenging to read. I could easily explain SRI’s experiments, their results,
and the significance of the results in language that an average person or politician would
understand. Anyone with experience writing computer manuals could do it. SRI has never tried.

Why has SRI shied away from press conferences and Sunday Supplement simplified
explanations of their research? Part of the reason may be because cold fusion scientists have
been attacked because of the perceived fiasco of the 1989 University of Utah press conference.

Critics say that cold fusion is “science by press conference.” McKubre and others have been
careful to avoid that stigma. In fact, the “science by press conference” accusation is gross
hypocrisy. Science is always done by press conference, and it always has been. Major
experiments at the hot fusion Tokamak reactors are featured on the seven o’clock news and the
front pages months before scientific papers are published.7 Things like the Hubble Telescope;
possible traces of  life on Mars in Arctic rocks that might have come from Mars; progress in
AIDS, and other major science stories are orchestrated and hyped every day in the media and in
Congress. There was nothing wrong with holding a press conference in 1989, and certainly
nothing unusual about it. They should have held a dozen more press conferences. The only
problem with the Utah announcement was that preprints of the Pons and Fleischmann paper were
not made available that day, in the auditorium.

Internal politics may be another reason SRI has kept this work obscure. There is a great deal of
hostile opposition to cold fusion within EPRI, from people like T. Schneider, as expressed in his
Introduction to Hoffman’s book A Dialog on Chemically Induced Nuclear Effects. 8,9 This
internal opposition eventually led EPRI to stop funding most of the research at SRI. The
Japanese NHE program is now funding it instead. The supporters of cold fusion within EPRI and
SRI should change their political strategy. They have stuck with it long after flaws were
revealed, just as they stuck with the calorimeter design and experimental protocols for too long.


Nuclear Evidence

The book contains a short section on the search for evidence of a nuclear reaction. They found
no significant helium or transmutations of the host metal, but they did find evidence of radiation
in an autoradiograph (Fig. 2).

Clear evidence of some type of ionizing radiation is observed. The points of light with
diffuse halo exposure suggest that some type of radiation may be coming from point
sources within the metal and being scattered by the lattice structure. p. 3-19
Approximately 10% of the total mass of some cathodes, including parts of the surface and bulk,
where analyzed by Rockwell International for helium. No significant levels of helium were
found. Based on the work of Miles and others, it seems likely that if helium was generated by the
reaction, it would have escaped into the electrolyte. The surface and near surface were subjected
to laser ionization (SALI) to look for evidence of fission transmutation: changes in isotopic
composition and expected elements. None were found. It is a shame they did not look more
deeply, where Mizuno and Minevski found transmuted metal. The authors do not think they can
confirm or deny the nuclear hypothesis. They write:
We can conclude that if a nuclear process gives rise to the heat, it does so largely by the
production of stable nuclei which so far have not been detected but have not yet been
seriously sought.

According to Tom Passell of EPRI, not “seriously sought” means that helium has been detected
but sources of contamination, like helium leaking in from the air, have not yet been rigorously
excluded.

After the book was published, Passell began a series of experiments looking for transmutations
in the used SRI cathodes, using prompt gamma activation analysis (PGAA). He believes he has
found an ~18% reduction in the ratio of boron-10 to palladium-105 in a cathode that generated
excess heat at SRI.10 This work is still underway.

The Report Summary makes a bold claim about nuclear evidence:
Although nuclear reaction products commensurate with the excess heat have not yet been
observed, small but definite evidence of nuclear reactions have been detected at levels
some 40 orders of magnitude greater than predicted by conventional nuclear theory.

Passell explained that the “40 orders of magnitude” refers to research in other labs, particularly
in neutron detection.


Confusion about Percentages and Electron Volts Per Atom

In two or three places, the book repeats a statement summarizing results. This was also included
in the 1991 ICCF2 paper:
For the thermodynamically closed and intentionally isothermal systems described here,
output power was observed to be as much as 300% in excess of the electrochemical input
power or 24% above the known total input power. When excess power was present, it
was more typically in the range 5%-10%, in a calorimeter that was accurate to better than
+0.5%. The largest excess energy observed corresponded to 1.08 MJ, or 45.1 MJ/mol, or
~450 eV/atom normalized to the Pd lattice or to the deuterium in the palladium at a
loading of ~1. 

Variations of this 5% to 10% number appear. A table (3.1, p. 3-3) shows Total Energy Excess in
megajoules and percent for 15 experiments. The percent numbers range from 0.24 to 3.88%.

These are meaningless averages. The 0.24% represents the total excess heat generated by the
cathode compared to all sources of energy that went into the cell during the entire experimental
run, including the initial incubation period, which sometimes lasted for weeks, starting with one
week preparation at low current. Unfortunately, Morrison and other members of the opposition
frequently quote these averages out of context, spreading doubts and confusion. They say that a
mere 0.24, or 3.88 or 5% excess must be close to the noise. This like asserting that I drive 10
miles per day, so my car goes an average of 0.42 miles per hour during the 24-hour day, so it
would be faster to walk. When the car is moving, it goes much faster than 0.42 mph. When the
SRI cells produce excess heat, they usually produce much more than 0.24%.

The average is much lower than it would be in most cold fusion experiments, because of the
design of the SRI calorimeter. SRI employs a compensation heater to keep the temperature in the
cell the same throughout the experiment. When the experiment begins, the compensation heater
is turned on high; power from electrolysis and excess heat is zero. When electrolysis goes on, the
compensation heater automatically decreases to balance. Heater plus electrolysis power together
keep the cell at the same temperature as the heater alone did at the beginning. When excess heat
turns on, the heater power decreases again. When excess heat fades away, the compensation
heater turns back up. The point is, this 0.24% excess represents of the excess energy compared to
all of the energy input into the cell from all sources, including the compensation heater. In most
other experiments, there is no compensation heater; cell temperature is allowed to increase and
decrease freely.

This confusion about percentages is compounded by another pernicious “skeptical” argument:
the stored energy hypothesis. It has often been asserted, even by distinguished scientists like
Frank Close, that a cold fusion cell is some kind of energy storage battery. The idea is that the
electrical energy input during electrolysis is stored in chemical bonds (electron bonds), and then
released later in the form of heat. David Williams, Professor of Chemistry at University College
London, believes in the battery hypothesis. He calls cold fusion “an inefficient, unreliable,
dangerous and expensive energy storage method.” If cold fusion is anything like a battery
storage system, it must be millions of times more efficient than any other form of chemical
storage, and it violates the established laws of chemistry.

McKubre specifies the order-of-magnitude energy release per atom of the cathode material as
240 eV (electron volts) per atom of cathode material. Pons and Fleischmann and others also use
this standard. They have seen much higher energy releases, thousands and even hundreds of
thousands of eV per atom. McKubre’s statement “~450 eV/atom normalized to the Pd lattice”
should make all skeptics realize that chemical energy storage is impossible, but even after six
years the arguments continue, so I will point out some basic physics that McKubre does not spell
out.

The largest amount energy that can be stored in any electron bond has long been established by
both theory and experiment. Most high energy density reactions, like burning coal, release 2 to 4
electron volts (eV) per atom. Some exotic reactions might theoretically produce as much as 18
eV per atom, but this has not been observed.11 Therefore, a release of hundreds or thousands of
eV per atom is far beyond the limits of chemistry.

Some skeptics have said that the energy release should be normalized against all of the hydrogen
atoms in the system, not just those in the palladium lattice. There is far more hydrogen in the
water than in the lattice. This makes no sense. The heat originates inside the cathode. The
hydrogen in the water is chemically inert; water does not burn. Some new hydrogen from the
water is pushed into the cathode from electrolysis, but the cathode is already supersaturated. The
new hydrogen merely displaces some of the old hydrogen, which bubbles out, rises to the
surface, and is recombined with free oxygen. This mechanism alone would not produce any
excess heat. When an atom is pushed into a lattice and it displaces another, there is no net gain or
loss of chemical energy, because no new chemicals are formed. Some skeptics have suggested
that the new hydrogen atoms entering the lattice “surrender their energy,” whatever that might
mean. Then they leave, to be replaced with others, which surrender more energy. No known
mechanism would allow this to happen, and even if it did happen, it would only act as a heat
pump, cooling the electrolyte and warming the cathode, with no net excess heat from the cell.

Finally, it should be noted that energy is not stored up during periods when there is no excess
heat. Except for the initial loading period when the palladium hydride is formed in a few hours,
input is balanced by output as closely as can be measured. If energy was being stored up in a
battery, the reaction would be endothermic: the heat energy output would be less than the
electrical energy input. But when a cold fusion cell does not produce excess heat, all of the
electrical energy that goes in comes right out again in the form of heat. Some energy is first
converted to chemical energy in the form of free oxygen and deuterium gas, but in the closed
SRI calorimeter, the gas is recombined back into heavy water, and the energy is released in the
form of heat. The skeptics counter that perhaps the energy is stored up very slowly, at tiny power
levels that cannot be detected. During the two-week incubation period that proceeds the onset of
excess heat, the skeptics claim that the cell is absorbing a few milliwatts of heat, at power levels
too small to be detected by the calorimeter. This might be the case with ordinary calorimeters,
but the SRI calorimeter is so sensitive it would detect the imbalance. The negative (endothermic)
power levels preceding the largest bursts would be well above the noise level.


Current Reversal Technique

The book describes an interesting technique which has not been highlighted in other publications
or lectures. To help keep the cathode clean, the workers periodically “strip” the cathode by
reversing the current and making the cathode into the anode and vice versa. (That is, they make
the palladium electrode positively charged, instead of negative, so that it attracts oxygen instead
of hydrogen.) This was described in a paragraph that gives the reader a sense he is looking over
someone’s shoulder, watching a group of skilled people make mistakes that lead to fruitful
discoveries.
Unaware of the possible existence of excess power within the calorimeter, the operators
prepared to anodically strip the cathode surface at a low current density by first reducing
the current to 30 mA (~10 mA cm-2) and then reversing the current. This sequence led to
extraordinary observations of resistance and thermal anomalies, shown respectively in
Figures 3A-4B and 3A-4f.
Passell explained that by making the anode a cathode for a while, you dissolve some of the metal
surface. He describes this as a “major technique” to boost loading.


Heat Promotes the Cold Fusion Reaction

The book ends with an all-too-brief discussion of the role of heat in promoting the reaction, a
topic critical to the science of cold fusion:
The apparent discrepancy between our observation of a roughly linear dependence of
excess power on current density and that of Fleischmann and Pons of a roughly
second-order dependence may be resolved by understanding the influence of temperature.

We have designed our experiments, as closely as possible, to decouple the influences of
temperature and current density; calorimetric experiments are performed under constant
input power conditions, approaching the steady state. Our calorimeters also have large
heat conduction so that, even in the condition of substantial excess power, the cathode
temperature is not raised appreciably. Under these conditions, we observe an
approximately linear response of excess power with current density.

In the experiments of Pons and Fleischmann, the current density is raised without
reducing the power in a compensatory heater, in a calorimeter with very low heat
conduction. For this reason, the cell temperature rises markedly with increasing current
density, and the temperature increase is exacerbated by the onset of any excess power
production. Under these conditions, Fleischmann and Pons observed a second-order or
higher power dependence of excess power on current density, with no observed
maximum.

Taken together, these results suggest that the rate of excess enthalpy production increases
at least transiently, with increasing temperature. Such a degree of autocatalysis would be
useful in achieving large power gain; the apparent positive derivative with temperature
suggests that it may be possible to produce heat efficiently at a usefully elevated
temperature.

McKubre did not always succeed in decoupling the influence of temperature. In my review of
ICCF6, 12 I described an incident cited by McKubre in which a heat burst was caused when the
flow was accidentally blocked and the cathode temperature rose higher than planned. The event
was shown in two graphs from the ICCF4 proceedings (Fig 3, 4). 13 The flow was blocked just
before hour 1952 for four hours, when a piece of black electrical tape got into the pipe. This was
discovered just before hour 1956, the problem was corrected, and the excess heat began to drop,
fading an hour later. Total energy from the burst was 368 kilojoules. If I had been in charge of
the research, I would have immediately throttled the flow again to see if that caused another heat
burst. Many important scientific discoveries have been made by following up such fortuitous
accidents. Yet this incident is not described in the Final Report. I see no evidence that the people
at SRI followed up on it. As far as I know, nobody working with the flow calorimeters IMRA or
the NHE lab has tried throttling the flow.


Fifty Sigma Results

The introduction to this volume leaves no doubt that authors believe they have fully reproduced
and confirmed the cold fusion effect. This is an unequivocal endorsement of the claims of Pons
and Fleischmann.

EPRI PERSPECTIVE This work confirms the claims of Fleischmann, Pons, and
Hawkins of the production of excess heat in deuterium-loaded palladium cathodes at
levels too large for chemical transformation. However, the phenomena were obtained in
only about half the cells. From the conditions of loading, initiation time, and current
density on the successful observations of excess heat, it is understood why the
phenomena are so difficult to attain. The conditions in the successful cells were not
entirely under experimental control because the closed cells slowly leach silica and other
materials from the anode and its supports as well as from the cell walls . . .

The primary objective of further work on this subject will be to demonstrate which
nuclear reactions, if any, are generating the excess heat. The only way to do this is to
observe in at least roughly quantitative fashion the nuclear reaction products or "ashes."
At this time, it is thought that the most likely ashes will be helium of mass 4 observable
in the vapor phase of closed cells. The reaction producing helium needs to be known in
order to maximize this excess heat phenomena for practical uses in the nuclear power
industry. 
- Introduction

We do not claim to have examined all possible sources of systematic error in our
calorimetry. However, highly instrumented and monitored experiments, using
calorimeters of considerably different design and principle, have resulted in qualitatively
and quantitatively similar results, i.e., apparent excess heat bursts outside the standard
deviation of the random errors by factors up to 50. 


Contents of Book

This book consists of ten major sections; seven printed on paper, three on microfiche. It is too
bad the entire book was not produced on CD-ROM and made available via the Internet World
Wide Web. It would be much easier to use in electronic form; the page number is confusing, and
there is no index. It includes 60 illustrations, graphs, charts and schematics; and five tables. This
is a comprehensive, expensive book. It is somewhat repetitive. Much of the text was previously
published in conference proceedings and peer-reviewed papers. The text not as repetitive as it
first appears. The equipment was modified and improved before each set of tests. It is described
again in each section, using text that has been copied and modified.

This book does not cover all of the SRI work on cold fusion. It does not include anything about
the loading studies with palladium wire and other topics covered in some of McKubre’s lectures.

This work will be covered in another volume, Research Project 3170-01.

For a shorter look at the SRI experiments, see the article in the Journal of Electroanalytical


Chemistry. 6

Here are the section numbers and titles:
1. Introduction
2. Degree-of-loading Studies
3. Calorimetric Studies
3A. Experiment P19: A Comprehensive Data Compilation
3B. Experiment P1b
4. Nuclear Detection Experiments
5. Summary and Discussion
APPENDICES (Microfiche)
A. Lockheed Report - Nuclear Detector Experiments
B. Patents Disclosure
C. Accident Investigation Report
Item C. refers to the tragic accident on January 2, 1992, in which Dr. Andrew Riley was killed.

This was also described in: S.I. Smedley et al., “The January 2, 1992, Explosion in a Deuterium /
Palladium Electrolytic System at SRI International,” Frontiers of Cold Fusion; Proc. 3rd Int.

Conf. Cold Fusion, Nagoya, 1992, Universal Academy Press, Tokyo, 1993


Overkill Example

When a cold fusion cell produces megajoules of energy per mole of cathode material, most
scientists consider that proof of excess heat “beyond the limits of chemistry,” like a match that
burns for an hour. The authors of other cold fusion papers have never bothered to quantify this
assertion; they merely list the total energy output and leave to the reader to draw the obvious
conclusion. In the SRI book, no assertion is left uncorroborated, even one as indisputable as this.

They take the “skeptical” argument seriously, long enough to dispose of it. Experiment P19
produced 790 kJ of excess energy, mainly in three bursts. An inventory of chemicals in the cell;
all known chemical reactions; and the total energy these reactions could produce are shown on
pages p. 3A-14 through 3A-16. Here is the inventory:

* A footnote here shows the level of detail taken into account: “Other solid parts are Al2O3, SiO2
and PTFE, which are considered in this analysis to be nonreactive.

Reactions and (approximate) energy releases are:

An in-depth discussion of these reactions shows they are extremely unlikely because, for
example, there is no “unlimited supply of oxygen” in the cell. If we assume oxygen does
1. F. G. Will, National Cold Fusion Inst., U. of Utah, Investigation of Cold Fusion Phenomena in
Deuterated Metals, Final Report
2. Fritz G. Will, Krystyna Cedzynska and Denton C. Linton (National Cold Fusion Inst., Salt
Lake City, UT), "Reproducible Tritium Generation in Electrochemical Cells Employing
Palladium Cathodes with High Deuterium Loading," J. Electroanalytical Chem., vol. 360, no
1-2,1993, pp 161-176
3. M. H. Miles, “Anomalous Effects in Deuterated Systems,” Naval Air Weapons Center
(NAWCWPNS TP 8302), 95 pages
4. M. Fleischmann (Univ. Southampton), S. Pons (IMRA Europe), “Calorimetry of the Pd-D2O system:
from simplicity via complications to simplicity,” Physics Letters A, 176 (1993) 118-129
5. M.C.H. McKubre, J. O’M. Bockris, “ICCF6 Summary and Reviews,” Infinite Energy #10, p.
6. M. C. H. McKubre et al., “Isothermal flow calorimetric investigations of the D/Pd and H/Pd
systems,” J. Electroanalytical Chem., 386 (1994) 55-66
7. For example: J. D. Strachan et al., “Fusion Power Production From TFTR Plasma Fueled with
Deuterium and Tritium,” PPPL-2978, March 1994. The experiment was trumpeted in the mass
media when it was performed, five months before this first short paper was published.
8. N. Hoffman, A Dialog on Chemically Induced Nuclear Effects, American Nuclear Society
9. J. Rothwell, “REVIEW ‘A Dialogue on Chemically Induced Nuclear Effects,’ Infinite Energy
No.3, July/August 1995
10. T. Passell, “Search for Nuclear Reaction Products in Heat Producing Pd,” 6th Internat. Conf.
on Cold Fusion, paper O-035
11. R. Forward, “Alternate Propulsion Energy Sources,” Air Force Rocket Propulsion
Laboratory TR-83-039, May 1983
somehow get in, the four reactions would produce a total of 7 kJ, less than 1% of the total, or 3%
of the energy produced by the larger continuous heat bursts.


Footnotes

12. J. Rothwell, “Review of ICCF6,” Infinite Energy #10, p. 13
13. M. McKubre, “Loading, Calorimetric and Nuclear Investigation of the D/Pd System,” Proc.
4th Int. Conf. on Cold Fusion, Lahaina, Maui, EPRI TR-104188, Vol. 1, p. 5-22 - 5-23
