I thought Issue No. 4 for 2011 was good. There was a paper by the Mosier-Boss [1] showing structures and
craters. I would like to comment about them. I think the concept of plasmoids is vitally important for CF researchers to
understand since these are produced in CF devices and are a part of the energy output and effects. As I wrote in articles
almost 20 years ago, since plasmoids produced in various devices behave like ball lightning, the natural phenomena
and the experimentally produced phenomena are identifiable. Even if micro-meter sized ball lightning-type objects are
not produced in a particular device or experiment, understanding the concept helps people to understand atomic effects
when atoms transform to a ball lightning state. Here is an update about plasmoid effects in CF devices since my article
was published in this journal in 2009 [2]; and to show evidence of the relationship of transmutation and plasmoids, K.
Shoulder’s evidence from the 1990s is described

In the past issues of Infinite Energy starting from the earliest issues in 1997, there are articles I have written about
plasmoid theory, ball lightning in CF-LENR devices, ball lightning and tornadoes. My most recent articles on this
Early evidence of the link between ball lightning and transmutation is in Shoulder’s 1999 article [4]. For the pit in
Fig. 19 that was described above, Shoulders did an elemental analysis, and his results are shown in Fig. 20. That is
clear evidence of elemental change at the point of the pit.subject were published in Infinite Energy (Issue 83) and in the Journal of Condensed Matter Nuclear Physics in 2009
[2]. These two latest articles explain the BL markings and previously unknown phenomena such as post-experiment
filament growth and plasmoid activity found by the several groups in the decade of the 2000s.

Now about 11 different groups have reported finding similar-looking unusual craters and markings that I believe are
similar to those shown more than 14 years ago by Matsumoto and Ken Shoulders. The most recent new reports that I
am aware of are those of Adamenko et al. who describe a “Lochak Monopole” hypothesis to explain the markings and
those of the SPAWAR group and Mosier-Boss. Since I wrote the 2009 article in 2008, both Adamenko and Mosier-Boss
have published microscopic pictures of their apparatus that show pits or craters. For example, Fig. 5b in the paper by
Mosier-Boss et al. [1] shows a crater that could be due to the impact or the emergence of a ball lightning-type object.
Compare it to the pit markings pictured in my 2009 article [2].

The pit in Figs. 4c and d of Adamenko’s article [3] is about 1.6 µm wide, and its “sloshing” around it (as Ken
Shoulders calls it) is probably due to the boring of a ball lightning object since a typical BL track leads to it. These
kinds of “tire-track” traces (as several groups of Russian researchers termed them) also appeared in the experiments of
Savvatimova and Urutskoev. The lip of material around the side of the half moon-shaped hole looks much like the lips
of materials sloshed around the pits and tunnels photographed by Ken Shoulders. For example, similar sloshings are
seen around the pits in Figs. 4–7, 9, 13, and 19 of Shoulder’s 1999 article titled “Charged Clusters in Action.[4]” His
article is about the effects of EV (plasmoid) impact. Can it be simple coincidence that the pits are similarly shaped and
of similar sizes? Or do the similarities imply that micro-BL is the cause of the markings in both Shoulders’ experiments
and Adamenko’s experiments? In my article [2], I tried to explain that a spiral motion of BL objects may be the cause
for several kinds of the tire-track markings of the researchers. Shoulders later wrote the same thing in an article.

Early evidence of the link between ball lightning and transmutation is in Shoulder’s 1999 article [4]. For the pit in
Fig. 19 that was described above, Shoulders did an elemental analysis, and his results are shown in Fig. 20. That is
clear evidence of elemental change at the point of the pit

Recently, super-fast video cameras are revealing the pervasiveness of the ball lightning phenomena in nature. Ken
Shoulders sent me links to recent videos of lightning bolts that were made by Tom Warner. By using a new kind of
super-fast video camera, people can see that balls of light lead many of the lightning bolts before the bolts become
visible. People can see the lightning bolts with their eyes. What they can not see are the big ball lightning moving
around that lead the bolts and the bolts lighting up behind them. These bright leading objects are caught on the videos.
The big balls of light that lead the lightnings are fast-moving macroscopic natural ball lightnings.

I would like to encourage researchers to study ball lightning and plasmoids. Plasmoid research goes back to W.
Bostick, and the phenomena was pursued by Ken Shoulders. Winston Bostick called these objects that make these kinds
of markings “plasmoids” decades ago. This information is important for researchers because a microscopic electrical
object that most researchers do not know about plays a large part in transmutation and CF reactions. The more of
them, the more energetic and transmutation effects according to reports by Matsumoto, Shoulders, and Savvatimova.
Do people understand the connection to ball lightning? Natural ball lightnings are a kind of a general class of material
objects I call “plasmoids”

I would also like to point out that there was a typographical error in the abstract of my 2009 article in the journal.
Instead of “angstroms”, the unit of measurement should be micrometers. I think that there are micro-BL that are
angstroms wide. However, I think the unusual microscopic pits and traces in their pictures are due to BL-type phenomena
that are about 0.1–400 micrometers wide. I am sorry there was a typographical error. Maybe software put in the symbol
automatically


References

[1] P. Mossier-Boss et al., Review of twenty years of LENR research using Pd/D co-deposition, J. Condensed Matter Nucl. Sci. 4
(2011) 173.
[2] E. Lewis, Tracks of ball lightning in apparatus?, J. Condensed Matter Nucl. Sci. 2 (2009) 13. www.iscmns.org/CMNS/JCMNSVol2.pdf.
[3] P. Adamenko and V. Vysotskii, Experimental observation and analysis of action of light magnetic monopoles on multilayer
surfaces, Annales de la Fondation Louis de Broglie33(1–2) (2008) 13.
[4] K. Shoulders and S. Shoulders, Charge Clusters in Action, (1999), manuscript article.