1. INTRODUCTION  

Ten years ago, we started gas-loading experiments to detect energetic charged particles from the D/Pd 
system using CR-39 (solid state nuclear track detector)[1]. At that time we assumed that energetic charged particles 
should be necessary nuclear products, but not neutrons. The gas-loaded system was selected for its compatibility 
with CR-39. When we improved the gas-loading technique, the high-pressure, low-temperature loading system was 
switched to a low-pressure, high-temperature system. That made it feasible to combine the calorimetric 
measurement with the loading system. The distinction was evident between the H/Pd and D/Pd system in 
calorimetric behavior [2]. There was up to 2 W/cc of “excess heat” in the D/Pd system. The highest excess heat 
reached 100 W/cc in a burst [2]. To avoid uncertainties in heat transfer coefficient, a new scheme was developed to 
avoid any power input inside the D/Pd system. After careful calibration, we showed that the temperature of the D/Pd 
system might rise spontaneously while the temperature of the D/Pd system was higher than that of surrounding 
medium.[3] Gradually, we realized that with the high temperature gas-loading system, the loading ratio was no longer 
a unique criteria to generate excess heat. A pumping rate works effectively to trigger a sudden rise in the resistance 
of palladium wire. It might be interpreted as a sudden jump in the loading ratio, if the loading ratio is calculated in 
terms of resistance-loading curve [4]. A sudden jump in palladium temperature always accompanied this jump in 
resistance when the electrical current in palladium wire was kept constant. In order to analyze the cause of this 
resistance jump, we switched from the constant-current mode to the constant-temperature mode. The power input to 
the palladium wire was controlled by a computer to keep the temperature of the palladium wire constant. It was 
observed that the resistance jump remained in the temperature-constant mode as well; hence, it should be attributed 
to a jump in loading ratio. Moreover, the temperature-constant mode provides additional evidence of excess heat, 
because the reduction in power input is a direct measurement of the excess heat in the D/Pd system. This is true even 
if you do not know the exact value of heat transfer coefficient, as long as the heat transfer coefficient is assumed 
constant. We shall discuss this pumping effect first. 


2. PUMPING EFFECT IN A GAS-LOADING D/PD SYSTEM  

When we heat the palladium wire, we may anticipate that the loading ratio of D/Pd will drop if the 
pressure is kept constant. However, the experiments show this is not the case. Absorption occurs at the high 
temperature even if the pressure is lower than one atmosphere [5,6,7]. In our gas-loading experiments, a pumping 
effect was reproducible. We observe the pumping effect in the same experiment at different points on the loading 
curve, and we observed the same pumping effect in various experiments with different configurations (Pd wire, Pd 
tube, or Pd film). When the palladium wire was heated by electrical current through this wire in the deuterium gas, 
the resistance of the palladium wire was recorded to monitor the loading ratio. Fig. 1 shows a schematic of apparatus, 
the details of which were described in Ref. [2] and [3]. As indicated by an early experiment [8,9], the resistance of a 
palladium wire depends on both its loading ratio and its temperature. Figure 2 shows the resistance of the palladium 
wire, R(Pd), as a function of its temperature and loading ratio (x=atomic number ratio of D/Pd). Each dotted line 
shows the resistance as a function of its temperature (TPd) for a specific loading ratio (D/Pd). When we kept the 
electrical current, I(Pd), in the Pd wire constant and changed the temperature of Dewar wall (Tw), the Pd wire 
changed its temperature, TPd, to keep the thermal flow in balance with the electrical power input. The loading ratio 
was not changed when the TPd dropped from point 1 (180ºC) to point 2 (157ºC) and rose from point 2 to point 3 
gradually. Turning on the pump at point 3 introduced a jump in loading ratio from 0.3 to 0.45 (point 3 to point 4). 

The time between two adjacent data points was 10 seconds only; hence, it was a quick jump. This jump was 
followed by a temperature rise due to the enhancement of the electrical power input at constant I(Pd) (point 4 to 
point 5). 

Fig. 2. Pumping at 160ºC induced a jump in loading ratio 

This kind of behavior appeared once and once again every time the pump was started. It was thought that 
this jump in resistance was induced by a positive feed-back mechanism as follows. The pumping reduced the gas 
pressure; hence, the heat conductivity through gases was reduced. Consequently, the temperature of palladium wire 
(TPd) was enhanced because the heat transfer was reduced. The enhancement of TPd would cause the enhancement of 
resistance; hence, the electrical power input would be enhanced and it would cause the TPd  to rise further. However, 
this kind of positive feed-back mechanism is not supported by the time behavior of the resistance of the Pd wire, 
because the resistance jumped up much faster than the temperature rose at the onset. The jump in the loading ratio 
came first. Nevertheless, what we were most interested in was whether any excess heat accompanied this jump in 
loading ratio.  


3. CONSTANT-CURRENT MODE AND CONSTANT-TEMPERATURE MODE 

When the electrical current in palladium wire, IPd, was kept constant by the power supply, the temperature 
rising after pumping may be caused by two factors: the jump in power supply and the reduction in heat transfer 
coefficient. Even if we may assume that the heat transfer coefficient does not change at the low pressure, we have to 
distinguish the heat from the electrical power input and the “excess heat “ (if any). We may calculate the heat 
transfer coefficient, which is defined as: 

Here, VPd is the voltage applied on the palladium wire; Tw is the temperature of Dewar wall; MCp is the heat capacity 
of palladium wire; Qex is the excess heat if any. If TPd reaches its steady state,
If the value of k is known, we may use eq.(2) to calculate the excess heat, Qex , in terms of IPd, VPd, TPd, Tw and k. In 
fact, we do not know the exact value of k. However, if there is any excess heat in the D/Pd system, we expect to see 
a drop of the value k4, every time the Qex increases. k4 is defined as 

This was observed at the onset of pumping. One might suspect that the sudden change in TPd might cause this jump 
in k4; therefore, a further experiment was run in the constant-temperature mode. 

Fig. 3. Power is not a function of P(3), but directly related to pumping rate (990711-0.xls) 

A computer controlled power supply was used to keep the temperature of the palladium wire, TPd, constant. 
A tiny Pt thermistor was attached on the palladium wire to closely monitor the temperature as a sensor for TPd. The 
TPd could be preset to a fixed value in the computer software. In this way, we eliminated the temperature effect 
during the pumping; however, we were still able to see this drop in k4. 

When we started pumping the deuterium Dewar at 40,000 sec. in Fig. 3, the power necessary to keep the 
constant TPd dropped quickly. One may suspect that the drop in deuterium gas pressure reduces the heat conductivity; 
hence, the necessary electrical power is reduced. This interpretation is not correct. When the pressure in the Dewar 
increased slowly from 200 Pa to 700 Pa. The k4 did not increase with the pressure at all. When we increased the 
pumping rate again at 48,000 sec., k4 dropped suddenly again. It is clearly shown that the k4 is a function of 
pumping rate but not the function of pressure in the Dewar. Particularly, when we stopped the pumping at 63,000 
sec., the k4 jumped up quickly although the gas pressure was still very low in the Dewar. These data exclude the 
possibility of explaining the jump of k4 as a jump in heat transfer coefficient. Indeed the jump in k4 is possibly 
evidence of excess heat. Assuming a constant heat transfer, this jump of k4 corresponds to excess heat of 0.035W, 
which is about 15% of the input power (0.24W). The volume of the Pd wire is about 0.237 cm3 ; hence, it is on the 
order of 0.15 W/cc at the temperature of 50ºC. Based on the high temperature electrolysis experiments [7,10], We 
might anticipate that the excess heat would be enhanced at higher temperature. Fig. 4 showed the similar data at 
95ºC and 100ºC. When the temperature of the Pd, TPd, was kept constant, the pumping at 69,000 sec. introduced a 
resistance jump and a power drop again. Since the TPd was kept constant, the change in resistance was attributed to 
loading, and the change in power was due to the excess heat. When the electrical power dropped from 2.28W to 
1.84W, the temperature of Pd was still kept at 95±0.5ºC . If the heat transfer coefficient did not change during the 
pumping; then, the excess heat power was about 0.44W, which is 19% of the power input. When the pumping was 
stopped at 160,000 sec., the necessary power jumped back to 2.3W. This effect was reproduced in the next day, at 
218,000 sec. the necessary power dropped to 1.84W due to the pumping again. There were two jumps in power at 
250,000 sec. and 297,000 sec., respectively. They were different in nature. The first power jump at 250,000 sec. was 
due to the setting in computer. We required that TPd should jump from 95ºC to 100ºC at 250,000 sec.; then, the 
computer increased the power input to meet this requirement. However, at 297,000 sec. we stopped pumping, and 
the power jumped up instantly to keep TPd =100ºC. Fig. 4 shows that k4 does not change at 250,000 sec., but k4 
jumps from 1.70×10-10 →2.15×10-10 W/K4 at 297,000 sec. It shows clearly that pumping causes the change in k4. In 
other word, the pumping may introduce a kind of excess heat in parallel to the jump in loading ratio. The power 
density for this excess heat near 95ºC is about 1.8 W/cc 

Fig. 4. Excess heat under constant T(Pd), 1998,12,13--17. (5_days7.xls) 

We have extended this experiment to TPd=120ºC, and kept pumping as long as 20 days. The k4 value was 
kept low until the pumping was stopped after 20 days. The corresponding excess heat power was 0.6W at 120ºC 
(greater than 2.5 W/cc). 


4. DISCUSSION 

Using the gas-loading method, we observed a power drop induced by pumping. This power drop may be 
related to excess heat on the order of 2 W/cc It is reproducible, and it can last as long as 20 days. If this is excess 
heat from the D/Pd system then it is of the order of 300 eV/atom. It is much greater than that from any conceivable 
chemical energy source. However, we have to do two more experiments to make it compelling. Firstly, we should 
put this whole gas loading system in a Seebeck calorimeter. We need an independent measurement of the heat flow, 
which does not rely on any heat transfer coefficient on the surface of palladium wire. Secondly, we should strive to 
reach a state which may keep the palladium wire warmer than the surrounding medium while the power input is 
entirely eliminated (i.e. a kind of “heat after death” effect). 

With data from these two additional experiments in hand we will be able to state with confidence that the 
excess heat is reproducible and non-chemical origin.  


REFERENCES 
[1]Xing Z. Li, et al. “Anomalous Nuclear Phenomena and Solid State Nuclear Track Detector,” Nucl. Tracks. Radiat. 
Meas., .22, 599 (1993). See also: Shi. Y. Dong, Xing Z. Li, et al., “Precursor to ‘Cold Fusion’ Phenomena and 
the Detection of Energetic Charged Particles in Deuterium/Solid System,” Fusion Technology, 20, 330 (1991). 
[2] Xing Z. Li, Wei Z. Yu, et al., “ ‘Excess Heat’ Measurement in Gas-loading D/Pd System,” Journal of New 
Energy, Vol.1, no.4, Fall 1996, p.34.  
[3] Xing Z.Li, Shu X. Zheng, Hai F.Huang, Gui S. Huang, Wei. Z. Yu, “New Measurement Of Excess Heat in a 
Gas-Loading D/Pd System,” Proceedings of 7-th International Conference on Cold Fusion, April 19-24, 1998, 
Vancouver, Canada. Edited by ENECO, Inc. Salt Lake City, Utah USA, p.197.  
[4] J. Minato,T. Nakata, K. Kunimatsu, et al. “Materials/surface aspects of hydrogen/deuterium loading into Pd 
cathode,” Proceedings of 5-th International Conference on Cold Fusion, April 9-13, 1995, Monte-Carlo, 
Monaco, Edited by IMRA Europe, p.383. 
[5] W.A. Oates, Ted B. Flanagan, “Formation of Nearly Stochiometric Palladium-Hydrogen Systems,” Nature 
Physical Science, 231, 19 (1971). 
[6] C. Manduchi, G. Mengoli, et al. “Anomalous Effects during the Interaction of Subatmospheric D2 (H2) with Pd 
from 900ºC to Room Temperature,” IL NUOVO CIMENTO, 107 A, N.2, p.171 (1994). 
[7] G. Mengoli, M. Bernadini, C. Manduchi, G. Zannoni, “Calorimetry close to the boiling temperature of the 
D2O/Pd electrolytic system,” J. of Electroanal. Chem., 444, 55 (1998). 
[8] Feng S. Bu, Xing Z. Li, et al., “Loading Ratio Study in a Gas-loading System,” Proceedings of 6-th International 
Conference on Cold Fusion, Vol.1, edited by M. Okamoto, October 13-18,1996, Japan, (Published by New 
Energy and Technology Development Organization, and Institute of Applied Energy), p187. 
[9] Gui S. Huang, Xing Z. Li, “ A Possible Phase Transition in a Gas-loading D/Pd System,” ibid. Vol.1, p198. 
[10] M. Fleischmann and S. Pons, “Calorimetry of the Pd-D2O system: from simplicity via complication to 
simplicity,” Physics Letters A. 176, 118 (1993). 
