1. Diagonosis of GD neutrons

1.1 The characteristic spectra of the pulse height distribution (abbr. CSPHDs) for 10B (n,
a. )7 Li# reaction:
First we slowed part of the GD neutrons down to thermal neutrons. Thermal
neutrons reacted with 10B in two channels as follows: 

10B + n -> a. + 7U# +2.31 MeV (93.9% )

10B + n -- a. + 7U +2.79 MeV ( 6.1%)

So thermal neutrons would produce two kinds of CSPHD which expressed
characteristic of the two said reaction channels. The CSPHDs of the GD neutrons and
of the Am-Be source neutrons had been measured respectively with BF 3 neutron
detectors, as shownin figure 1. 

1.2 The filtering of thermal neutrons :
The thermal neutrons slowed down from GD neutrons were measured by the au 
thermoluminescence films. In order to differentiate this kind thermal neutrons, Cd films 
mm 
thickness) 
were 
used 
as 
thermal 
neutron 
filters 
and 
the 
au 
thermoluminescence films were irradiated both in the covering cadmium and in non­
the covering cadmium. For estimating influence of -v rays, those thermoluminescence 
films of au and 7U were irradiated simultaneously. The sensitivities of the au and 7U
thermoluminescence films to -v rays were calibrated with -v source in advance. The 
difference coefficient of the said two sensitivities, i.e. Nr(aU) / Nr(7U), was 1.13. 

The thermoluminescence films were irradiated by the GD neutrons . Pb plate (5 mm 
thickness) was used to eliminating X rays background from gas discharge process and 
to increasing thermalization effect of polythene to GD neutrons. 

The background counts of au thermoluminescence films originated from the 
following two aspects. one was natural background counts, which could be cut with 
the background counts of a set of thermoluminescence films that were not irradiated. 

The other was -v background counts, which could be estimated with the counts of 7U 
thermoluminescence films that were irraditated simultaneously. 

The results of GD neutrons measurement were listed in table 1. The experimental 
results showed: (1) the counts of au thermoluminescence films in non-the covering 
cadmium were higher than those of 7U thermoluminescence films; (2) the counts of au
thermoluminescence films in the covering cadmium were equal to that of 
7U 
thermoluminescence films within the range of experiment error. 

1.3 n--v discrimination spectra :
Neutrons were differentiated from -v rays by an n--v discrimination technique with 
NE-213 organic liquid scintillation neutron pectrometer. This device was also used to 
measuring the n- -v discrimination spectra from an Am-Be neutron source, an 22Na -v
source and the gas discharge facility (here were the background -v rays). The results 
of measurement were shown in figure 2. 

1.4 Neutron energy spectra :
The neutron energy spectra of GD neutrons have been measured with NE-213 
organic liquid scintillation neutron spectrometer by a n--v discrimination technique . A 
0.5 mm thick Cu film was placed in front of the spectrometer, for eliminating the :
influence of strong X rays (27 keV) from the gas discharge facility. The recoil proton 
Neutron energies were calibrated with 22Na source. The measurements of recoil
proton spectra were shown in figure 3. 

The neutron energy spectra, which were solved from the recoil proton spectra and 
those relevant respond functions, were shown in figure 4. 

The GD neutron energy measured in experiments and the D-D neutron (90 ° 
direction) energy were both 2.38 ± 0.15 MeV, which agreed with the average energy 

2.45 MeV of normal D-D reaction neutrons within the range of experiment error. :

1.5 The comparative experiments of hydrogen discharge :
There were not neutrons detected in hydrogen discharge under otherwise equal 
conditions. 


2. The measurement of GD neutron yield

The GD neutron yield was measured by using BF3 counting devices. The counting
mode of the BF3 counting devices was anticoincidence mode in order to eliminating 
influence of electromagnetic disturbance and high voltage sparking. For this purpose, 
a "simulating BF3 neutron detectors" system was designed to cooperate with the 
"signal BF3 neutron detectors" system. The two system formed an anticoincidence 
counting system. 

The efficiency of the BF 3 neutron counting devices, which was calibrated with Am-
Be neutron source, was 8.33 x 10-3. The time dependence of GD neutron yield was 
shown in table 2. 


Reference 

1. Wang Dalun, Chen Suhe, Fu Yibei, et al. Chinese Joural of Atomic and
Molecular Physics, 1993;10(3):2789.

2. Wang Dalun, Chen Suhe, Fu Yibei,et al.High Power Laser and Particle
Beams, 1993;5(3):333.

3. Karabut A B,Kucherov Ya R,Sawatimova I B,Phys Lett, 1992;A170:265.

4. Nobuhiko Wada,Kunihide Nishizawa,Jap J Appl Phys, 1989;28(11 ):2017.


Fig I. Characteristic spectra of the pulse height 
distribution for IOB (n,a )7Li* reaction 

Fig 2. n--, discriminating spectra 
of gas-discharge neutron 

Fig 3. The recoil proton spectra produced 
by gas-discharge 

Fig 4. The neutrons spectrum produced by gas-discharge 

Table 1. The measurable result of meutron detector for 6Li thcrmolaminesccnce 

Table 2. Time dependence of gas-discharge neutrons 
