1 Introduction 

This paper describes five experiments that were performed to load hydrogen into natural (not enriched) 
metallic uranium samples. All samples were taken from the same batch. One sample randomly selected was 
considered the reference (control) sample and the other five were loaded with hydrogen. The electrolysis 
parameters are presented in the next section. Non-spectrometric alpha, beta and gamma radioactivity of each 
sample was measured using a Ludlum Model 3030 alpha-beta counter, and  gamma ray spectra were recorded 
using an ORTEC gamma ray spectrometer. The results of the alpha, beta and gamma counting are presented in 
section 3. The results of the gamma ray spectrometry are presented in section 4, and the changes in topography 
and surface composition are given in section 5. These results  are discussed in section 6. 


2 Hydrogen loading parameters 

The cathode was natural uranium foil, 0.18 mm thick, of purity 99.98%. It was obtained from 
Goodfellow Corp. The electrolyte was H2SO4, in deionized H2O. For S2, DC1 and DC2 the H2SO4 which was 
used was obtained from Alfa Aesar, Stock number 11000, Lot B05119, and the electrolyte was 0.83M. For 
experiments with cathodes DC3 and DC4 the H2SO4 was obtained from J.T. Baker, lot K10030 and the 
electrolyte was 0.74M. The anode was made of platinum foil, 0.1 mm thick, 99.99% purity (metal basis), Lot 
Number: 09119EU, obtained from the Aldrich Co. It was a circular platinum disc under the cathode for S2, DC1 
and DC2, and had the shape presented in Fig. 1 for DC3 and DC4. 

The uranium cathode foil was pierced and the platinum cathode lead wire was bent to make a small 
hook which is then crimped against the uranium foil. After attaching the cathode to the cathode holder, the 
electrical contacts for samples DC2, DC3, and DC4 were insulated with 732 Multi-Purpose Silicone Sealant, 
(100% silicone rubber), to minimize electrolyte contact with the U-Pt contact. With this design the U-Pt contact 
corrosion was minimized, thus enabling prolonged electrolysis. 

Fig. 1. The electrolysis cell 

The cell design is presented in Fig. 1 where the numbers represent: 

1. Beaker (200 ml, Pyrex) 

2. Electrolyte 

3. Pt Anode 

4. Anode Pt holder  

5. Teflon cap 

6. Pt cathode holder 

7. Uranium foil cathode 

8. Electrolyte level 

With this cell five experiments were conducted. Experiments labelled as S2 and DC1 did not have 
insulation covering the electric contact between the platinum cathode lead wire and the cathode, while DC2, 3 
and 4 had the electrical contact insulated. The electrolysis parameters are summarized below.             

Table 1. Current, voltage, current density and electrolysis time for the five experiments. 


3  Non - spectrometric alpha, beta, and gamma radioactivity measurement 

The samples were weighed and radioactivity was measured with a Ludlum Model 3030 Alpha-Beta 
Sample Counter, having an organic scintillator in a shielded chamber and a pulse-height analyzer that provides 
information to two independent counters. The counter has a RS232 interface that enables data acquisition and 
operating parameters control and adjustment using a PC. The counter was used in the scaler mode. The count 
accuracy of the detection system is 2%, as stated by the manufacturer. 

Each sample was weighed before and after the experiment using a Mettler model H70 balance. After 
that the samples were cut in such a manner that the parts that were above the electrolyte level were separated 
from the parts that were below the electrolyte level. The parts that were above were labeled  with a trailing P1a 
while those that were under the electrolyte during the experiment were labeled with a trailing P2u. In addition to 
the α and β counts that the Ludlum Model 3030 counter provides, γ radioactivity was measured as well. In order 
to do a γ radioactivity measurement the sample was completely covered with an aluminum plate 0.9 mm thick. 

The aluminum plate completely absorbed α particles and statistically almost all of the β particles. Therefore the 
counts on the β channel with the aluminum plate between sample and detector are proportional to the γ activity 
of the sample. 

For each sample the background on both alpha and beta channels was measured before the counting 
and was subsequently subtracted, and the specific radioactivity, that is counts per second per gram, was 
calculated. The results of the measurements performed with the Ludlum counter for the two parts of the sample 
are presented in Table 2. Variation is defined as electrolyzed sample radiation minus control sample radiation 
divided by control radiation. 

Table 2. Alpha, beta and gamma radiation and variation for the five samples and control 

The data presented in Table 2 is plotted in Figures 2 and 3. Examining Table 2 and Figures 2 and 3, we 
notice that alpha variation is bigger than  beta, and beta is bigger than  gamma variation. We also notice that for 
sample S2 and DC1 (no insulation on cathode contact), the part that was above the electrolyte has a bigger 
increase of the specific radioactivity for all the three types of radioactivity than the part that was under 
electrolyte, while for the samples DC2 through DC4 (insulated cathode contact) the results show the opposite.  

Fig. 2. The variation of the specific alpha, beta and gamma radioactivity of the part that was above electrolyte, 
compared with the reference sample S1. 

Fig. 3. The  variation of the specific alpha, beta and gamma radioactivity of the part that was under 
electrolyte, compared with the reference sample S1. 


4 Gamma ray spectroscopy results 

The gamma spectra were acquired using an ORTEC gamma ray spectrometer with 8000 channels and a 
germanium detector cooled to liquid nitrogen temperature. The spectra were analyzed with Gammavission-32 
software. Each sample was placed in a plastic dish and counted for one hour on each of the sides, and the data 
was averaged. The data averaged for the two sides of each part of each sample, divided by the mass, therefore 
expressed in gamma counts per gram - hour, are presented in Tables 3 and 4.  

Table 3. Specific (counts per gram-hour) gamma and characteristic x-ray data for control and for the 
portions of the samples above electrolyte. 

Table 4. Specific (counts per gram-hour) gamma and characteristic x-ray data for control and for the portions 
of the samples below electrolyte. 

Among the gamma lines and the characteristic x-ray lines, the Th234 92.4 keV gamma line, U 98.5 keV 
Kα1 x-ray, and U235 186 keV gamma line counts are measured with the smallest error. Therefore, they were 
selected to be presented. The plots of specific counts for the samples, measured separately for the part that was 
above electrolyte or under electrolyte, expressed in counts/gram*hour, are presented in Figures 4 through  6. 

Fig. 4. 92.4 Th234 keV gamma ray specific intensity for the electrolysed uranium samples
compared with the control 

Examining Figure 4 we notice that for S2 and DC1, hydrogen loading produced a significant increase 
of the specific 92.4 Th234 keV gamma ray emission and for the other three samples the variation is within the 
experimental error, for the parts of the samples above electrolyte. Four of the parts that were under direct 
hydrogen exposure, that is under electrolyte, present a significant increase of the specific 92.4 Th234 keV gamma 
ray emission while one (DC4) has no significant variation. 

Figure 5 shows that both parts of  samples S2, DC2, and DC3 present a decrease of the 98.5 keV 
uranium Kα1 characteristic x-ray specific counts. The portion of DC1 above the electrolyte level has about 10% 
lower intensity than the control, but the portion below has the same intensity as the control. Both parts of DC4 
have about the same intensity as the control. Figure 6 reveals that U235 gamma ray specific radioactivity 
increased as a result of hydrogen loading for both parts of S2 and DC1 and for the parts of DC2 and DC3 which 
were below the electrolyte level. It was not modified for DC4.  

Fig. 5. Kα1 98.5 keV uranium characteristic x-ray specific intensity for
the electrolyzed uranium samples compared with the control 

Fig. 6. 186 keV U235 gamma ray specific intensity for the electrolysed uranium
samples compared with the control (S1). 


5 Topography and surface composition 

Changes in surface morphology which resulted from electrolysis were determined with a scanning 
electron microscope (SEM), and changes in surface chemical composition were determined with an energy 
dispersive spectrometer (EDS) attached to the SEM. 

A typical image of the natural uranium surface before electrolysis is presented in Fig. 7. The 
surface  is nonuniformly fissured and granulated, with granule sizes up to 3-4 µm. 

Fig. 7. Magnified image of the unelectrolyzed natural uranium surface magnified image of the 
unelectrolyzed natural uranium 

Sample DC1 was electrolyzed and analyzed following the same procedure, that is taking a low 
magnification image first, then high magnification images and spectra from several locations. A magnified 
image of the surface of sample DC1,. after absorbing hydrogen, is presented in Fig. 8. Sample DC1 presents 
evidence of pitting, which may have been caused by the formation of uranium hydride and erosion. The surface 
is covered with pits having a typical size of about 1 µm. The main difference in the topography of the surface is 
that on the unelectrolyzed natural uranium sample surface the granules  protrude above the surface while on the 
electrolysed sample the surface is pitted. 

Fig. 8. A  magnified image of the DC1 uranium surface after hydrogen loading by electrolysis. 

The concentrations of thorium and carbon were measured on an as-received natural uranium sample 
(the control) and on each sample after electrolytic loading  with hydrogen. The concentration data were obtained 
with an Oxford Model 5565 EDS, attached to an ISI Model SS40 SEM. The data presented in the tables and the 
standard deviations, hereafter sigma, are atomic concentrations.  

First only thorium and uranium were selected on the list for the quantitative analysis. Table 5 presents 
the average values of thorium concentrations and the average standard deviations (σ). 

Table 5. Average thorium concentration and standard deviation for the control natural uranium sample 
(S1) and for the samples that were loaded with hydrogen. 

The averages are calculated for each sample separately. Table 5 shows that there is an increase of the 
thorium concentration for the hydrogen-loaded  uranium samples compared with the control, but the increase is 
smaller than one sigma. All of the  thorium concentrations in Table 5 exceed two standard deviations, so the 
results are significant. 

The carbon concentrations on the sample surfaces were also determined by EDS. Table 6 presents the 
average values of the surface carbon content and the average standard deviations for each sample. Examining 
Table 6, we notice first that the carbon concentrations are significantly larger than two standard deviations. All 
of the electrolysed samples have significantly less carbon than the unelectrolyzed control. The origin of this 
carbon is not known. 

Table 6. Carbon average concentrations and standard deviations for the control natural uranium sample (S1) 
and for the samples that were loaded with hydrogen. 

The data presented in Tables 5 and 6 is plotted in Figures 9 and 10, respectively. 

When examining the Tables 5 and 6, we should be aware that the concentrations that are written on 
the SEM analysis sheet are not the absolute concentrations. For example, 1% Th means that the ratio 
Th/U is 1/99,  and 50% C means that the ratio C/U is 50/50, etc. Another important point is that the 
EDS analysis gives the composition of the surface to a depth of about 1 µm, since a 20 keV electron 
beam is used. 

Fig. 9. Thorium concentration for electrolyzed samples compared with the control (Unat). 

Fig. 10. Surface carbon concentration for the electrolyzed samples compared with the 
control,Unat contro 


6 Discussion 

The results of the experiments of loading hydrogen into natural uranium samples using electrolysis 
reveal that the intensity of the alpha radioactivity of the samples increased after loading hydrogen, both for the 
parts that were located under electrolyte and above electrolyte. The same result was found for the beta 
radioactivity. The gamma radioactivity increased for the parts of the samples that were under electrolyte for all 
the samples and for the parts that were above electrolyte for four out of five samples, and was not modified for 
one of the samples. These results show with a precision that is well above the experimental errors that the alpha, 
beta and gamma radioactivity of the natural uranium samples increased as a result of absorbing hydrogen. 

Gamma ray spectrometry revealed that for the majority of the samples the intensity of the 92.4 keV 
Th234 gamma line increased, the intensity of the 186 keV U235 increased and the intensity of the 98.5 keV 
uranium Kα1characteristic x-ray peak decreased. The atomic electron excitations are produced primarily by the 
alpha particles emitted by U238 decay. The alpha emission proved to be more intense but the uranium 
characteristic x-ray intensity decreased. This suggests that the uranium concentration in the electrolyzed sample 
decreased while the U235 and Th234 concentrations increased. Th234 follows U238 directly in the U238 decay chain, 
as presented in equation 1. The half life is 24.10 days [1]. The increase of Th234 concentration suggests that the 
U238 decay rate has been increased as a result of hydrogen absorption. 

A set of nuclear reactions that might explain the increase of the U235 concentration, under the 
assumption that the decay rate stated in equation 5 is increased, might be: 

The half life of the isotopes in equations 2 through 5 are taken from [2 - 6]. The nuclear reaction in 
equation (2) is suggested in [7] and the reaction mechanism in [8]. 

These results are very similar to those reported in [9] and [10] where the gamma ray spectrometry and 
thermal ionization mass spectrometry results reveal a 1% decrease of the uranium concentration in the samples 
that were exposed to hydrogen isotope plasma. In order to verify that the U238 half life has been decreased,  
measurements must be taken periodically over a time interval of years to check whether the alpha radioactivity 
remains increased and whether the Th234 gamma activity remains higher than for the reference sample. Another 
way to verify that the U238 decay rate has increased for all the isotopes in the U238 decay chain would be to 
measure the Pb206 to Pb204 ratio by mass spectrometry in both the electrolysed samples and the reference sample. 
If it is higher in the electrolyzed sample than in the reference sample, then the whole U238 chain decay rate has 
been increased by hydrogen absorption. This result was already obtained for uranium exposed to hydrogen 
isotope plasmas [10]. 


References 

[1] A.M.Sanchez, P.R.Montero , Simplifying Data Fitting using Branching Ratios as Constraints in Alpha 
Spectrometry, Nucl.Instrum.Methods Phys.Res. A420, 481 (1999) 
[2] A.Lorenz , Decay Data of the Transactinium Nuclides , IAEA Tech.Rept.Ser., No.261, 1986. 
[3] S.A.Woods, D.H.Woods, M.J.Woods, S.M.Jerome, M.Burke, N.E.Bowles, S.E.M.Lucas, C.Paton Walsh, 
Standardization and Measurement of the Decay Scheme Data of 243Am and 239Np, Nucl.Instrum.Methods 
Phys.Res. A369, 1996, p. 472. 
[4] D.Sardari, T.D.Mac Mahon, S.P.Holloway , 239U and 243Am Decay Data, Nucl.Instrum.Methods Phys.Res. 
A369, 1996, p. 486.  
[5] G.T.Ewan, J.S.Geiger, R.L.Graham, D.R.MacKenzie, Conversion Electron Spectrum of Np239 and Level 
Scheme of Pu239, Phys.Rev. 116, 1959, p. 950. 
[6] A.M.Sanchez, P.R.Montero , Simplifying Data Fitting using Branching Ratios as Constraints in Alpha 
Spectrometry, Nucl.Instrum.Methods Phys.Res. A420, 1999, p. 481. 
[7] J.J. Dufour, J.H. Foos, X.J.C Dufour, Formation and Properties of Hydrex and Deutex, Conf. Proce. Vol 64, 
Anomalies in Hydrogen/Deuterium Loaded Metals, S.I.F., Bologna, 1999, p. 29. 
[8] H. Kozima, K. Arai, Local Coherence, Condensation and Nuclear Reaction of Neutrons at Crystal Boundary 
of Metal Hydrides and Deuterides, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 25 (9), 2000, p. 845.  
[9] J. Dash, I. Savvatimova, S. Frantz, E. Weis, and H. Kozima,  Effects of Glow Discharge with Hydrogen 
Isotope Plasmas on Radioactivity of Uranium, Proc. of the 9th International Conference on Cold Fusion, Beijing, 
p. 77, 2002.  
[10] J. Dash, I. Savvatimova, S. Frantz, E. Weis, Effects of Glow Discharge with Hydrogen Isotope Plasmas on 
Radioactivity of Uranium, submitted for publication. 
