Introduction 

The Third International Cold Fusion Conference took place in Nagoya, Japan between 
October 21 and October 25, 1992. Over 300 attendees participated, listening to about 27 oral 
presentations and looking over roughly 80 poster papers. Many people have asked me about the 
conference, and rather than repeating the same things over and over again, I thought that it would 
be useful to put my thoughts down on paper as a more efficient method of communication. 

Given the near complete absence of cold fusion sessions in more traditional physics and 
chemistry meetings, the international conferences represent about the only chance for people in 
the cold fusion field to get together and learn about what has happened lately. The international 
conferences, starting with the Salt Lake City conference in 1990, followed by Como, Italy in 
1991, and now Nagoya, Japan in 1992, have been and continue to be the most important sources 
of reliable and relevant information in the field; an important meeting was also held at BYU in 
1990 which focused on nuclear products. The field is advancing pretty rapidly these days, and 
since publications tend to lag with more than a year's delay, the conferences and conference 
proceedings play a key role in the field. The next international conference was originally 
scheduled to take place in Hawaii in November, 1993; I understand that it may be delayed until 
December. 

The results presented at this conference were overall technically much stronger than last 
year's conference, and benefitted by a very strong showing from the Japanese contingent. I will 
first itemize what I thought were some of the most interesting new experimental results presented 
at the conference. 

I admit to having numerous biases. One bias is that I believe the observations of excess 
power are ultimately the most important, both scientifically and technologically. Another bias is 
that I favor results which in my view help to elucidate reaction mechanisms. 

Following the discussion of significant positive results, I review abstracts and 
presentations of negative results. Coming from the theory end of the field, I felt that it was 
appropriate for me to survey the theory papers which were presented (in the following section); 
in this case, it was possible to include a larger fraction of the papers submitted. Having my own 
theory as to the origin of the effect, I warn the reader that my discussion of theory necessarily 
carries a bias in favor of my world view; it is my hope that this discussion will be useful in spite 
of this bias. Almost as interesting in some cases as what was presented, was what was not 
presented; a discussion of work that was absent is presented before the summary and 
conclusions. 

For a review as long as this one, there are many issues and many details, most of which I 
have made a serious attempt to get right. I would hope that I will not make enemies of those 
whose work I did not include (which at this point will include about half of all papers submitted). 
This review was constructed from preprints, notes, memory, and discussions with many people 
in the field -- should the reader note errors or misconceptions, I would appreciate corrections. 


Survey Of Positive Results 

1. S. Pons1,2 described briefly recent results obtained at the Japanese-funded IMRA 
laboratory in Sophia Antipolis, France. During the Como meeting (July, 1991), Pons and 
Fleischmann had announced that they were able to obtain very high levels of excess 
power production (on the order of 1000 Watts/cm3) corresponding to a factor of 10 power 
gain, and that they had done so 11 times. 

Part of their research since then has focused on defining a procedure that would improve 
on the reproducibility of this very high power effect (at Como, they had announced that 
complete reproducibility had been attained on achieving consistent excess power at lower 
levels). At Nagoya, Pons reported that this had been accomplished; that very high levels 
of heat production (more than 1 kilowatt/cm3) were now obtained reproducibly 
accompanied by a factor of 4 power gain. 

The key to the new results included some advances that they outlined. One such 
improvement involves the observation that the excess power generation increases at 
higher temperatures. The cathode is charged at intermediate current densities at 
temperatures below 50E C for several days, and then the current is stepped up. Due to the 
relatively low thermal loss of the cell and calorimeter, the cell temperature rises, but the 
loading is maintained. This rise improves the excess power generation, which in turn 
drives the temperature higher; the positive feedback leads to very high excess power 
generation and vigorous boiling. 

Pons and Fleischmann perform their calorimetry using open cell systems, which have the 
advantage of being cheaper and more accessible, and allows them to do more 
experiments at a time. The particular method of calorimetry which they have developed 
was motivated in part by the existence of the positive feedback described above -- Pons 
and Fleischmann are able to achieve good calorimetric precision with time-varying 
electrolyte levels, cell temperatures and cell voltages. Most others have sought in their 
work to maintain either constant temperature or power, or else require the presence of 
steady-state conditions in their system to obtain accurate results. Very few groups have so 
far taken advantage of such sophisticated methods to obtain excess power values from 
their raw data; no other groups have yet reported the ability to obtain reproducibly the 
high power and boiling mode reported by Pons and Fleischmann. 

It was pointed out by Pons that the calorimetry could be checked during the very high 
excess power burst by measuring the time taken to boil away the electrolyte, and using a 
knowledge of the heat of vaporization to compute the total energy and hence power 
generation. He presented the results of this analysis for one cell, which he said was in 
agreement with the calorimetric results. 

Pons stated that 2.5 moles (close to 50 cc) of D2O were boiled away during a time of 
about 10 minutes, during which time the average iv input power was 37.5 watts. The 
numbers can be checked, as follows: The heat of vaporization of heavy water is about 41 
kJ/mol at 100E C, and 2.5 moles of heavy water corresponds to 102.5 kJ; the energy lost 
during this time in the calorimeter (primarily radiative) is 6.7 kJ. The input electrical iv 
energy during this time is 22.5 kJ. The excess energy produced is the output energy 
(102.5 + 6.7 kJ) minus the input energy (22.5 kJ), or 86.7 kJ. The production of 86.7 kJ in 
10 minutes corresponds to an excess power of 144.5 watts, and a power gain of 3.85. 

The volume of the cathode was given to be 0.0785 cm3, which was noted by many (this 
volume was in error, as will be commented on shortly). The average excess power 
claimed during the boiling episode was 144.5 Watts, which would correspond to 1841 
W/cm3. 

The cathode geometry was given by Pons to be cylindrical, with a diameter of 2 mm and 
a length of 1.25 cm. I note that this geometry does not correspond to the volume quoted 
by Pons above -- a rod of these dimensions would have a volume of 0.03927 cm3, which 
is almost precisely a factor of 2 smaller than the volume given during Pons talk. Pons has 
confirmed that this smaller volume is correct (the correct value appears in their 
conference proceeding2). I will continue my discussion here using the corrected power 
per unit volume, which is 3682 W/cm3. 

The anomalous excess energy production in this experiment is considerable, as can be 
calculated. In 1 minute, 8.7 kJ of excess energy is produced. At a density of 12.02 g/cm3 
and an average mass of 106.42 amu, pure Pd contains 6.8 H 1022 atoms/cm3. The total 
number of atoms in the cathode is 2.7 H 1021, or 0.0044 moles. In 1 minute, the excess 
energy production is 1.96 MJ/mole, which corresponds to 20.3 eV/atom of Pd. This 
number is greater than can be accounted for by a chemical explanation for the effect. 
After 10 minutes, the cathode has produced 203 eV/atom. 

In the absence of current flow, film-boiling limits the heat flow from the cathode at 
cathode temperatures higher than about 120E C; the maximum heat flux from the rod 
under these conditions is limited to I think somewhere near 125 Watts/cm2. The surface 
area of the cathode, including the top and bottom, is 0.85 cm2, which leads to an observed 
average heat flux of about 170 Watts/cm2. This number is comparable to, but greater than 
my version of the film-boiling limit given above, and was a potential cause for concern. 

Pons and Fleischmann have considered this effect, and have found experimentally that 
the presence of current flow delays the onset of film-boiling to higher temperatures and 
higher heat fluxes. In their conference proceeding, they claim2 to have observed heat 
transfer rates during electrolysis in separate experiments which are between 1-10 
kW/cm2. I consider this result to be very important. 

The cathode gets very hot in these experiments. Pons and Fleischmann have observed the 
Kel-F supports at the base of the cathodes to melt, from which the presence of 
temperatures in excess of 300E C are inferred. A direct measurement of the cathode 
temperature is currently problematic; Pons is currently interested in practical proposals as 
to how to do this without impacting the electrochemistry. 

A common misunderstanding often occurs in the discussion of the results of Pons-
Fleischmann experiments which is of interest here. It is sometimes argued that the energy 
production during a short event can be disregarded, since there may exist energy storage 
mechanisms which could have been collecting energy at a low level for a long period of 
time. For example, the total energy output from this experiment would not be very much 
larger than the total input energy if no heat excess had occurred prior to the boiling event 
(1 watt-day = 86.4 kJ). This type of argument seeks to make palatable the notion that 
since the total energy excess measured over days is small compared to the input (and 
hence there might exist a signal to noise problem in the measurement), the measurement 
can be dismissed. As discussed above, this type of argument completely misses a key 
implication of the experiment -- specifically, that there exists no known physical 
mechanism which could store the energy observed to be released during the boiling 
episode. 

It is true of this experiment as well as of others to be described below, that no products or 
“ashes” of the heat have been found and verified that are commensurate with the energy 
production. This will be discussed further below. 

2. M. McKubre3,4 described experiments done at SRI during the past several years. They 
have developed closed cell flow calorimeters, which are ideally first principle 
calorimeters (which means that the heat flow out of the cell goes into the flowing water 
coolant, and the power generation is determined by measuring the mass flow rate and 
output to input flow temperature difference, with no calibration required). They have 
succeeded in reducing the conduction losses (which are not first principle contributions) 
down to the order of one per cent, and then they calibrate the Fick's law constant 
associated with the conduction losses. Overall, the SRI calorimeters achieve a relative 
accuracy in the calorimetric measurements which is on the order of a few tenths of a per 
cent. 

The SRI group reported the development of a procedure at Como that appeared to yield 
excess heat essentially every time, and this method is described in the Como conference 
proceedings. Highlights of these experiments were discussed. A significant advance that 
was pioneered by the SRI group was described: it consisted of the addition of aluminate 
or silicate to the electrolyte, which caused the formation of a colloidal surface layer that 
passed light ions (deuterium, lithium, boron,...) and shielded the surface from impurities; 
this procedure improves the ability of the Pd rod to maintain a high loading ratio. 

Two distinct modes of excess power generation were observed; one in which the excess 
power occurs at relatively low levels (1%-50%) and responds to changes in current 
density (they have observed 38 occurrences of this mode, lasting hours to many days), 
and one that is characterized by much higher relative power levels (up to 350% excess) 
and appears to be insensitive to changes in current (this mode has been observed 3 times, 
lasting many hours). 

For the first mode of heat generation, SRI finds that the excess power rises linearly with 
current above a threshold current density (which is on the order of 100-200 mA/cm2). A 
graph illustrating this appears in their conference proceeding.4 This is in apparent contrast 
with the Pons and Fleischmann results, which showed a possible quadratic component to 
the increase above threshold current. Discussion during the meeting pointed to the fact 
that the SRI experiments are run at constant temperature, while the temperature of the 
Pons and Fleischmann cells increase when excess heat is produced. 

Mckubre presented a graph of excess power production as a function of fractional 
deuterium loading as determined from resistance ratio measurements. This dependence 
was found to increase roughly parabolically above a loading of 0.85 (Pxs-(x-0.85)2) up to 
loadings near 0.95, which is as high as had been achieved during their C1 experiment. 

The group has spent considerable effort chasing down and quantifying uncertainties in 
the SRI experiments, and are now able to assign meaningful error bars to essentially all 
quantities measured and inferred in their experiments. The result of this analysis yields 
rather high sigma numbers on the excess power measurements (in excess of 50 sigma on 
some of the best data analyzed so far). 

Their largest power numbers correspond to on the order of 15 W/cm3; it would take a 
small number of hours of running at this level to defeat a chemical storage explanation. 
Their highest excess total energy numbers have reached 200 MJ/mole of Pd, which 
corresponds roughly to 2 KeV per Pd atom; this level of excess energy production cannot 
be of chemical origin. 

3. K. Kunimatsu5,6 of IMRA JAPAN Co. in Sapporo presented results on their heavy water 
electrolysis experiments. A number of things struck me as being interesting about this 
talk, aside from the fact that this is one of the first presentations of anything from this 
group at a conference at which I have managed to be. This effort appears to have a great 
deal of resources and some nontrivial technical expertise. They reported excess power 
measurements as a function of loading (where the loading was determined through 
measurements of the deuterium gas pressure in the cell), and arrived at essentially the 
same dependence of excess power on loading fraction as SRI, but with the cut-off shifted 
down by a few points relative to the SRI results (from a D/Pd ratio of 0.85 inferred from 
a resistance ratio measurement, down closer to 0.83 determined from measurements of 
the D2 gas pressure6). The peak excess power occurs when the current density is greater 
than 100 mA/cm2, and the peak excess power which appears on the graph in Ref. 6 is 
about 35%. 

The IMRA experiments differed qualitatively from the SRI and Pons-Fleischmann 
experiments in that they were run in fuel-cell mode. Conventional Pons-Fleischmann 
electrolysis experiments are run such that D2 gas is generated at the cathode and O2 gas is 
generated at the anode. IMRA has developed a pressurized cell in which deuterium 
reactions occur at the anode. Cells operating in fuel-cell mode have been developed in the 
past, however, this is the first time that I am aware that a Pons-Fleischmann cell has 
generated excess power sufficiently reliably while operating in such a mode to produce 
relatively high quality excess power data of the sort presented. 

This group seems to have good people, good funding, and much expertise. They 
presented several poster papers on studies of excess power generation, and the absorption 
of hydrogen and deuterium in palladium cathodes7-10 I think that we will be hearing much 
more from them in the future. 

I note that a positive correlation between loading and excess heat production in a Pd/D 
modified Pons-Fleischmann experiment was reported by Scaramuzzi and De Ninno in a 
poster paper.11,12 

4. Ya. R. Kucherov13-15 from the Luch Association, Podolsk, Moscow Region described 
experiments that I thought were very important. 

The experiment involves using a glow discharge to load a Pd (or other metal) foil (1 cm H 
1 cm H 0.1 mm - 1.0 mm) in D2 gas at 10 torr, with a 400 V discharge (10 - 500 mA 
current). Apparently this group has had considerable experience with glow discharges 
and is aware of several tricks that help to preserve the surface of the cathode which helps 
to attain very high loading (a D/Pd ratio of more than 1). 

Numerous effects are observed; excess heat production will first be considered. 
Temperatures were monitored using W-Re thermocouples in the cathode and anode, and 
also CC thermocouples in a heat collector some distance from the cathode. Calibration 
was done through comparing temperature histories of “live” Pd cathodes (cathodes 
producing neutron, gamma and fast particle emission) in deuterium with those of “worn 
out” cathodes (cathodes producing no anomalous emission). Excess power production at 
the level of tens of watts is observed; their best result out of 78 experiments is a 33 watt 
excess representing a power gain of a factor of 5. Given the small total cathode volume, 
the resulting power generation rate is quite high; the highest values are on the order of 
3000 watts/cm3 of Pd. The highest total energy production observed to date exceeds 20 
kJ. 

After about 100 seconds after the start of the discharge, neutron emission is observed (a 
huge signal, reaching up to 106 neutrons/sec in some experiments). The neutron detection 
described in their earlier work was done using RUP-1 silver activated ZnS scintillation 
detectors and type SNM-18 gas discharge (3He) detectors. The 106 neutron/sec signal 
appeared in the scintillation detector as 2000 counts/sec at a distance of 1 meter; the 
signal showed up as 10000 pulses/second at a distance of 30 cm on the SNM-18 detector. 
No emission was observed using a hydrogen discharge. 

After a while, gamma emission is then observed (also a huge signal, up to 105 
gammas/sec in some experiments). The gamma emission was studied using four detectors 
(Ge-Li, stilbene, NaI and SPS plastic); most of the recent results were obtained using a 
liquid nitrogen-cooled Ge-Li DGDK-50 detector with 1.6 keV resolution at 1332 keV, 
and an efficiency of 10-3 at 511 keV. An example of an anomalous gamma spectrum from 
Pd is shown in a recent publication16. 

Gamma lines were identified from short-lived isotopes (the gamma spectrum returns to 
its initial state in 3-5 days), and some of the identified lines originate in isotopes in the 
neighborhood of Pd (lines originating from isotopes with a nuclear charge of Z-3 to Z+8, 
where Z=46 for Pd, were observed). 

A very substantial flux (104 to 106 ions/sec) of fast ions is emitted from the cathode, and 
silicon surface barrier detectors were used for detection. The bulk of the emission occurs 
between 1-5 MeV, and in some experiments lasts for a few minutes after the discharge is 
switched off which allows for an accurate determination of the spectrum. Correlated fast 
ion emission was registered on calibrated CR-39 plates installed inside the discharge 
chamber. 

A small fraction of the fast ions are observed at high energy; peaks were observed at 6 
MeV, 12 MeV and 16 MeV. The mass of the particles at 12 MeV and higher was 
determined to be greater than or equal to 4, as determined through measurements with 
different barrier thicknesses. 

5. There was a Chinese team17-20 that presented results from a somewhat similar system to 
that described by Kucherov. A glow discharge was created by applying high voltage (7-
11 KV, 50 Hz) between two electrodes inside of a glass bulb containing deuterium at low 
pressure (4-13 torr). A thin (1 micron) metallic layer of the electrode material (for 
example, Pd) was deposited on the interior of the glass bulb. The glow discharge current 
was less than 100 mA; an anomalous current was observed with an average value of 1 A, 
and excursions up to 10 A. A D/Pd ratio of 0.5-0.8 was claimed to have been obtained. 

Substantial neutron emission (13-330 neutrons/sec) was observed, and the energy 
spectrum was resolved with a recoil proton fast neutron scintillation spectrometer. The 
resulting neutron spectrum contained both 2.0-2.5 MeV neutrons, and broad emission 
between 2.5-7.0 MeV; most of the emission occurred above 2.5 MeV. 

Neutron emission was also recorded from metals chosen at random, and the signal 
strength varied with metal according to the order Pt, Nb, W, Pd, Ag, Cu, Mo and Fe. The 
fluence observed from the D/Pt system was 1.2 H 104 neutrons/sec. 

The energy spectrum of the neutron emission for these metals was also observed. In the 
case of the D/Pt emission shows broad emission up to about 8 MeV, decreasing generally 
with increasing neutron energy, and with a number of possible peaks appearing. 

Intense gamma spectra were also observed with a NaI scintillation counter during the 
experiments; the gamma ray yield was about ten times that of the neutron yield. The 
gamma spectrum of D/Nb showed lines at tens of KeV, 3.4 MeV and 5.8 MeV, and some 
unresolved emission below 7 MeV. 

These experiments seem to me to be similar to the experiment described in 1989 by 
Wada.21 Another experiment of this sort was reported by Tazima, Isii and Ikegami, and 
also by Jin, Zhang, Yao and Wu, at the Como conference. 

6. E. Yamaguchi of NTT presented a paper22,23 on 4He production from a PdD foil that is 
sandwiched by gold and MnOx. I think of the NTT research labs as being the ATT Bell 
Labs of Japan, which has an excellent technical reputation. This paper attracted 
considerable interest in the Japanese media, and there were reports that the price of the 
NTT stock climbed as a result. The NTT stock climbed a bit more than 10%; Morrison 
pointed out in his review that the stock went back down to its pre-announcement value 
within a few days. 

In the experiments that he reported, a current of 0.5-0.8 A/cm2 is applied perpendicularly 
to the sandwich. The foil produces heat at a level of 0.5-5 Watts for about 1000 seconds 
(this is the case whether the foil is PdD or PdH), and then explosively outgasses. At the 
peak of the outgassing, the samples undergo substantial plastic deformation which lasts 
for about 10 seconds. During his presentation, it was not obvious whether the temperature 
rise observed was being claimed as anomalous or not. If the foil is deuterated, these 
phenomena are accompanied by 4He emission. 

Yamaguchi previously reported at the BYU conference very high levels of neutron 
emission from this system at a 106 neutrons/second. The experiments described at 
Nagoya included only helium, heat, and fast charged particle detection. 

The 4He emission is monitored using an expensive high resolution mass spectrometer that 
is capable of distinguishing between 4He and D2 signals, as was demonstrated. A minor 
peak in the data appears near the expected HT mass position, and Yamaguchi claimed 
that this signal indicated the presence of HT (Claytor notes in his trip report that the HT 
signal, if real, would imply a “radiological hazard (> 10 Ci).”). The H2D trimer is more 
massive than D2 and does not interfere with the 4He measurement. 

Yamaguchi sees 4He in his mass spectrometer when he uses PdD, and he sees no 4He 
when he uses PdH. Yamaguchi stated that the amount of 4He was “consistent with the 
heat,” but if he gave figures for the amount of 4He produced, I missed them. Given that 
heat occurs for PdH runs as well as for PdD runs, it is not clear what the statement means. 
Hopefully this issue will be clarified at a later date. 

When asked whether the 4He is due to contamination, Yamaguchi argued that it is not in 
the D2 gas used, it is not in the metal, and the vacuum system being used is a high quality 
system of the type used in semiconductor research that will hold a 10-6 torr vacuum for a 
month without pumping. 

Yamaguchi also sees 3 MeV protons and fast alphas at 4.5-6 MeV using two identical 
systems based on silicon detectors (Canberra Si-SSD:PD-450-19-700-AM; active 
area=4.5 cm2, active thickness = 700 mu). Protons were observed at 3 MeV, and were 
attributed to the p+t branch of the dd-fusion process. Significant emission was observed 
between 4.5-6.0 MeV; by comparing signals with and without an intervening 7 mu foil, 
these signals were identified as being due to either alphas or 3He nuclei. The total number 
of fast particles detected was a few hundred per experiment. 

The experiment which Yamaguchi and Nishioka have constructed looks very impressive; 
I got the impression that the helium measurement capability was relatively new. I think 
that the 4He signals are real, but I am less convinced yet that it has been made through an 
anomalous effect. The strongest argument in support of it being genuine is the rather 
strong time-correlation of the 4He signal with the temperature excursion of the foil. 

The NTT group has been active for years, and by now I think that the basic anomalies 
which they observe are likely to be right. The new result presented at Nagoya is the 
helium measurement, which I will be more comfortable with after Yamaguchi and 
Nishioka have had more experience exploring. I look forward to more results from this 
group. 

I note that the first significant claim for substantial 4He production in Pons-Fleischmann 
electrolysis experiments were made at Como by Miles and coworkers at China Lake. 
Previous negative results had been obtained in searches for helium in the cathode; Miles 
and coworkers claimed the observation of 4He in the gas stream. Miles presented a paper 
at Nagoya24 which gave an update of the group's recent efforts, which have been hindered 
by an inability to obtain significant excess heat. 

Bockris reported at Nagoya25 observations of 4He above background (by factors of 2-100) 
that accompanied tritium production (described below); the helium was analyzed by 
thermal expulsion and mass spectroscopy. 

7. S. Isagawa et al from the Japanese National Laboratory for High Energy Physics (the 
KEK collaboration) reported their results on experiments involving searches for heat, 
tritium and neutrons in Pons-Fleischmann cells.26,27 I was impressed that the KEK was 
working at all in this area, and even though they have apparently had an effort at some 
level since 1989, it appeared to me from their presentation that they have more or less 
just gotten started. 

Most of their results to date are negative, and it appears that they are confident that they 
are going to get the expected (that is, null) results. Of the possible excess heat events that 
they have observed so far, they have been able to rule out all but one as being due to 
known (non-anomalous) causes. Neutron emission is mostly not observed, but they have 
one event at 3.5 sigma of excess neutron emission (23 " 7 neutrons/sec) recorded over 
nine hours from one PdD cell after 20 hours of electrolysis. 

Although their results to date have little impact on the field, should they continue, their 
contributions could be and should be substantial in time. One thing that this group would 
be able to do which few other groups in the field are as well suited to do to bring on 
board the physics community. Positive results obtained at the KEK would stir interest in 
other physics laboratories as almost no other result. The physicists have written off Pons 
and Fleischmann, so they are free to ignore the claim of kilowatt/cm3 reported at the 
conference; but if the KEK gets 10% heat power at 10 Watts/cm3, I would bet that every 
physics lab on the planet will likely be pulling out their electrochemistry sets again. 

8. T. P. Perng of National Tsing Hua University in Hsinchu, Taiwan described observations 
of excess power from molten salt electrolysis experiments as part of a paper on heavy 
water Pons-Fleischmann experiments.28 Although I did not recall seeing it, and I have no 
notes of it, numerous friends at the conference mentioned it to me (including Liaw). I 
also received a preprint of this work. 

Liaw and coworkers at the U. of Hawaii described at the last two international cold fusion 
conferences experiments using molten salt electrolysis with Pd and Ti anodes in a LiCl-
KCl eutectic saturated with LiD. At Como, the group reported the observation of excess 
power at a level of about 10 times the input electrochemical power in Pd (up to a 30% 
increase over electrochemical plus heater power), with an energy gain reported as about 1 
GJ/mole Pd or 6 MJ/mole D2. The Pd anode volume was 0.040 cm3, so that the excess 
power per unit anode volume is about 250 watts/cm3. 

This result was important because the power excess was so large relative to the 
electrochemical input power, and because the temperature excess was on the order of a 
hundred degrees centigrade, which would have the potential for efficient energy 
extraction. 

Little progress has so far been reported toward a reproduction of the Liaw experiment. 
Perng described results from an experiment performed to provide a confirmation of the 
Liaw experiment; the power excess claimed was on the order of 2-5 times the input 
power. 

The preprint29 from C. M. Wan et al consists of an abstract and copies of 11 figures, from 
which I will attempt to give an account of the work. Following Liaw, the palladium 
electrode is used as an anode (instead of a cathode as is done in conventional Pons-
Fleischmann experiments), immersed in a KCl-LiCl eutectic saturated with LiD. The 
anode dimensions are 6 mm diameter and 5 cm length. The molten salt sits in an 
aluminum container which serves as the cathode. The temperature is sensed using a 
thermocouple embedded in a quartz tube which is placed in the molten salt in the general 
vicinity of the Pd anode. A Ni-Cr alloy resistive wire heater (encased in quartz) is 
wrapped around the cell, within a ceramic fiber insulator. Nearby is a 3He neutron 
detector with a 0.01% detection efficiency. 

From the figures and the abstract, it is clear that a time-dependent excess neutron signal 
appears following 200 hours of electrolysis, at twice background (background is 5.51 " 
0.44 cpm) corresponding to 800 neutrons/sec. This neutron signal is rather clearly 
correlated with the excess power production which is time-dependent and rises to about 
10 watts. Given the large anode volume, this level of excess power corresponds to about 
7 watts/cm3. The associated temperature excursions are about 25E C, with one excursion 
up to 50E C. 

The abstract quotes power gains of 5 to 108 for the 6 mm Pd rod which is 5 cm long, and 
power gains of 8 to 560 from a 4.5 mm diameter rod. These numbers are very high and 
represent excesses in comparison with electrochemical power rather than total input 
power; I think that the highest numbers correspond to modest excess powers observed at 
low input current level. 

There was an abstract from the National Tsing Hua University by Yuan et al that 
described a molten salt experiment;30 I do not know whether this paper was presented. I 
suspect that this paper may not have been presented, and that Perng was reviewing results 
obtained by his colleagues. 

9. There were several papers on attempts at replicating the Takahashi experiment that 
captured the attention of the Japanese press earlier this year. A. Takahashi described 
earlier this year obtaining tremendous excess heat in a heavy water electrolysis 
experiment that ran at an average of 1.7 output power over input power for about two 
months.31,32 The total excess enthalpy generated was claimed to be about 2250 MJ/mole 
Pd (more than 20 KeV per Pd atom), which is one of the highest claims to date from this 
type of experiment. Following Takahashi's announcement, many laboratories attempted a 
replication. 

Takahashi's experiment is similar in many ways to the classical Pons-Fleischmann 
experiments with some variations. A Pd foil from Tanaka Kikinziku Kyogo (Tanaka 
Precious Metals Co.) with dimensions 2.5 cm H 2.5 cm H 1 mm is used for a cathode 
instead of a rod. The electrolyte volume is very large (700 cc of D2O with 0.3 M LiOD). 
An innovation of Takahashi is the use of a time-varying current which alternates between 
a high mode (4-5 amps) and a low mode (0.2-0.4 amps) every six hours. 

Takahasi's calorimeter is an open cell flow calorimeter, where water from a chiller is 
flowed through a coil inside the cell, and the power is determined from a knowledge of 
the mass flow rate and the input-output temperature difference. An advantage of this type 
of calorimeter design is that it is able to function at near constant temperature when high 
power is applied to the electrochemistry. The temperature was monitored using teflon 
coated thermocouples at the inlet, outlet, and cell interior. The cell was calibrated before 
and after the run in the initial experiment, and the calibration lines were approximately 
reproduced. 

The total input energy for the initial experiment was 250 MJ, the total output energy 
measured was 410 MJ, leading to an excess of 160 MJ. Takahashi's excess power level 
claimed was 32 watts averaged over two months, with excursions to 100-130 watts. The 
cathode volume is 0.625 cm3 (0.0706 moles), so that the average power density is 51 
watts/cm3 and peak excursions are 160-208 watts/cm3. As discussed above, a chemical 
explanation of the effect (barring other systematic errors) is defeated in less than half an 
hour at the high excess power levels. 

Attempts at replication had varying degrees of success, but no one has been able to 
reproduce the very high power levels claimed by Takahashi. In the reproduction which 
Takahashi reported at Nagoya, the excess average power was 8 watts, with excursions to 
15 watts. 

Takahashi's method comes with the recommendation that it is a potentially technically 
easier experiment than other experiments which have been reported. It is less exacting in 
the rigorous electrochemical purities required as compared to the SRI experiments; the 
cathodes from Tanaka metals are readily available to workers in the field, in contrast to 
the Johnson-Matthey cathodes employed by Pons and Fleischmann. The system is in 
principle relatively cheap to set up; Mallove33 described a version of the Takahashi 
experiment which was built up using about $10K of hardware funds. 

Storms at LANL is claiming excess heat from a Tanaka batch 1 foil, and no heat from a 
batch 2 foil.34 The anomalous power from the first foil was more than 20%. The batch 2 
foil suffered an increase in internal volume on loading, which Storms suggested might be 
used as an indicator of whether a cathode was suitable for heat experiments. No one has 
reported a success with a batch 2 foil that I am aware -- batch 3 appears to be free of this 
problem. 

Celani35,36 described efforts to reproduce the Takahashi experiment at his laboratory in 
Frascati. Experiments were run in an open cell flow calorimeter using two Tanaka metals 
batch 1 cathodes, one Tanaka batch 2 cathode, and one IMRA batch 1 cathode. Positive 
results were obtained with the Tanaka batch 1 rods (at 8% and 25% peak power excess) 
and with the IMRA rod (12% peak excess). No excess power was observed with the 
Tanaka batch 2 cathode. Blank experiments were performed where a gold cathode sheet 
was substituted for the Pd cathodes, and no excess was observed. A correlation between 
high loading and excess heat was noted; small amounts of excess tritium were reported 
for the runs which gave excess heat. 

Oyama37 reported a 2.4% excess energy, which is small, but was measured with much 
smaller error bars; a light water blank showed no excess. 

10. Tritium production was discussed by several groups. The existence of such an effect is 
interesting because it constitutes an additional signature of the presence of a nuclear 
phenomenon; tritium cannot be made chemically. An additional feature of many tritium 
experiments is that the tritium is not accompanied by neutron emission (neutron/tritium 
ratios of 10-7 - 10-9 have been reported). The dd-fusion reactions would produce neutrons 
and tritons in roughly equal amounts, so that the observations imply either a new 
mechanism or else a very significant modification of the fusion reactions. Possibly more 
significant is that 14 MeV neutrons from d-t fusion reactions would be expected from 
secondary reactions if the tritium nuclei were created with MeV-level kinetic energy. The 
very low neutron to tritium ratios claimed imply a very low triton energy (below 10-15 
keV), sufficiently low to be inconsistent with all but the most exotic reaction 
mechanisms. 

At Como, strong presentations of tritium production were made by Will, Claytor, Lanza, 
Szpak. Will has not been active in the field during the past year, and did not attend the 
Nagoya conference; Lanza has continued, but was not able to attend this year; Szpak has 
continued, but was also not present at Nagoya. 

Claytor38 (whose work impresses me) described further experiments on tritium 
production in which a stack of alternating layers of palladium and silicon is placed in 
deuterium gas at over 10 atmospheres, and a pulsed current is passed through the stack. 
Reproducible tritium production is claimed at levels of 0.02-0.2 nCi/hr (1.1 H 106 - 1.1 H 
107 tritium atoms/second). Advances which the LANL group has made during the past 
year includes: reduction of background tritium, improvement in detection sensitivity, 
improvement in reproducibility at higher tritium generation rates, and the innovation of 
working with stacks using Pd built up from powder. Upper limits on neutron emission 
can be placed from their work as reported at Como of 4 H 10-9 neutrons/second; the 3He 
neutron detector which they have used (which I saw during a recent visit there) has a 
roughly similar efficiency for 14 MeV neutrons as for 2.45 MeV neutrons (the detector is 
more sensitive at 2.45 by a factor of 1.5 according to Menlove). 

Bockris25 described two tritium experiments at Nagoya. In one experiment, a 
reproduction of the Szpak-Boss experiment described at Como was attempted. Szpak 
codeposited Pd on either a Cu or Ni substrate from PdCl2 in D2O containing 0.3 N LiCl; 
continued electrolysis resulted in tritium production. The Pd was observed to plate out 
during the first 6-8 hours, and excess tritium would be detected about 10 hours later. The 
experiment Bockris reported involved codeposition of Pd on gold, and tritium production 
was observed to start as soon as 10 hours after the Pd deposition, and production up to 3 
times background was observed. This is the first successful confirmation of the Szpak 
experiment of which I am aware. Bockris did not obtain the high degree of 
reproducibility claimed by Szpak. 

I note that Miles also described24 attempts to reproduce the Szpak experiment, and 
reported the observation of a modest tritium increase, but “not clearly beyond levels 
expected for electrolytic enrichment due to isotopic separation factors.”
 
Much more spectacular are the results reported by Bockris of Chien's experiments on 
tritium production in a Pd electrolysis experiment where massive amounts of tritium 
(more than 1015 atoms) were observed. This report is very significant because it 
represents a new claim for very high levels of excess tritium. 

Early on, reports of very high levels of tritium were reported to have been observed at 
Texas A&M, corresponding to production rates on the order of 1010 tritium atoms/cm3 or 
higher. These experiments were clouded by charges of fraud (this charge was apparently 
investigated by a panel hired by Texas A&M, and not substantiated), and by the 
observation of high levels of tritium contamination in Pd claimed by Wolf (found by 
dissolving Pd rods in acid, and then performing scintillation counting on a neutralized 
version of the resulting solution). Similar experiments reported by Cedzynska (differing 
in that the distillate of the solution was analyzed by scintillation counting) failed to show 
contamination at the high levels reported by Wolf, and in addition found that false 
positives could occur when the solution was not first distilled. 

Subsequently, much more stringent controls were done to attempt to defeat the insidious 
tritium contamination claimed by Wolf, and new post-Wolf experiments were reported in 
which anomalous tritium production has been claimed. Except for experiments reported 
by BARC, most new claims have involved tritium production rates many orders of 
magnitude below those of the initial claims (the new claims generally ranged from 104 - 
106 tritium atoms/second). The significance of the Chien experiments is that the tritium 
production rate claimed by Chien (in a post-Wolf experiment) are some of the first to 
approach the very high early (pre-Wolf) experimental claims. Much care was taken to 
avoid possible contamination: samples from the same rod were dissolved in aqua-regia, 
and the resulting solution distilled, and then analyzed using a scintillation cocktail 
following the method described by Cedzynska at Como. 

Chien's earlier experiment was carried out at the Institute of Nuclear Energy Research in 
Lung-Tan, Taiwan. The palladium cathodes used were 1.0 cm in diameter, and 1-2 cm 
long; Pt wire wrapped around at a distance of 4 mm was used for the anode. Electrolysis 
was carried out in heavy water with 0.1 M LiOD; tritium assay was done with a 
scintillation cocktail. Solutions exhibiting high tritium activity were sampled at the time 
of the experiment (10/89), and then resampled 10 months later (8/90) in order to observe 
the tritium decay from the sample. Tritium generation rates of 106-109 atoms/second were 
determined, lasting for a total of 20-30 days. The numbers claimed by Bockris at 
Nagoya25 for the Texas A&M version of the experiment correspond to about 107 
atoms/sec/cm2 of surface area, in experiments with a 3-6 cm2 surface area. 

11. V. A. Romodanov gave an oral presentation in the theory panel at Nagoya.39 
Romodanov's command of the English language was imperfect; he read from his paper 
for more than 20 minutes in a thick Russian accent. Essentially no one with whom I 
talked understood the point of what he said, and his abstract did not particularly add to 
the information content. Given that his talk occurred in the theory section, and given that 
his theory appeared to be largely classical fusion modified somewhat by lattice effects, no 
one was expecting that a major experimental result was buried in his presentation. Two 
things about his talk raised flags for me, indicating that I should try to follow up if 
possible. One was that he was from Luch, which is the same place Kucherov is from...and 
I was very impressed by Kucherov's results. The second thing that I recall was that there 
was a table giving some very high tritium numbers; at the time I thought they were 
theoretical estimates because they were so large. 

Romodanov handed me a preprint40 which explained in rather clearer English what was 
the content of his talk. I will focus on what I consider to be the single most important part 
of his presentation, which if true, is of fundamental importance. Romodanov described 
the results of glow discharge experiments which appear to have been done on a system 
very similar to that discussed by Kucherov (see above in this review). Romodanov and 
his colleagues focused on the detection of tritium produced in glow discharge 
experiments in Pd and in other metals. 

The glow discharge was run in deuterium gas at 100-200 torr, with an applied voltage in 
the range of 40-125 V, and a current of 3-4 A (a wide range of operating conditions are 
described in the paper, and the numbers I have chosen appear on one table -- I am not 
completely certain from the paper that the tritium generation was done with these 
parameters). Various cathode metals were used, including Y, Mo, Nb, Er, Ta, and W; as 
disks with a diameter of 13 cm and a thickness between 500 mu and 1 mm, or rods of 
0.5-2 cm diameter. The cathode temperatures were measured to be between 970E K and 
1670E K, with only minor (15% or less due to anomalous self-heating effects). 

Tritium generation rates between 105 atoms/second and 109 atoms/second were measured 
in the different metals under various conditions. The largest rate (1.7 H 109) was obtained 
in Nb at 1170E K, corresponding to an increase in tritium activity in the deuterium gas of 
2.3 H 104. The neutron emission was measured in these experiments with a “radiac 
instrument RUP-1,” which appears to be a scintillator with silver activated ZnS dispersed 
in transparent plastic (sounds similar to the detector used by Kucherov), and a neutron to 
tritium ratio of 1.8 H 10-7 was obtained. 

12. R. Notoya from Hokkaido University brought a light water demo that was set up and 
operated in the hallway of the conference41. The demo consisted of two cells: in one cell 
was a resistive heater, and in the other cell was a nickel cathode immersed in a light water 
K2CO3 electrolyte, similar to the method of R. Mills and colleagues.42 Notoya's method 
differs from Mill's method in that (1) the Notoya cathode is made of porous nickel, and 
the Mills cathode is plain nickel; and (2) Mills uses an intermittent current, while Notoya 
uses a constant current. 

The resistive heater was driven at 2.1 Watts electrical iv input; the electrolysis cell was 
driven so that the joule heating in the cell was also 2.1 Watts. The iv input into the 
electrolysis cell is actually higher by about 30%, but since electrolysis is occurring with a 
Faradaic efficiency near unity, the power ending up inside the cell is matched as long as 
no recombination occurs in the space above the electrolyte. The live cell ran higher by 
about 15E centigrade than the blank, as could be inspected visually by observing alcohol 
thermometers immersed in both cells. Notoya claims that the light water cell temperature 
implies a factor of about 3 more net power input, or roughly 6 watts of heating present. 

This was interesting for a number of reasons. This was the first live demonstration of 
excess heat production at a cold fusion conference that I am aware of. I have always 
thought that live demos would start to show up at conferences and at presentations, but I 
had figured that the first ones would be heavy water demos. I thought that it was 
significant that Notoya's system works well enough for her to be willing to bring it as a 
demo at a major international conference. 

Many of the “established” workers in the field who have put in substantial effort on 
heavy water Pons-Fleischmann cells and have observed heat simply do not believe that a 
heat effect can be observed in light water. Among other arguments that can be heard is 
that if the effect is either nuclear or is fusion, it must involve deuterium. Others in the 
field argue that the light water claims are simply due to sloppy experimental work. 
Independent of the correctness of the various assertions, it is almost humorous to find 
senior members of the cold fusion community sounding very much like their critics and 
tormentors of 1989. 

The first reports of heat from light water experiments were actually from Pons and 
Fleischmann early on in 1989; when I last spoke with Fleischmann about light water 
experiments about a year ago, he was firm in his conviction that it was not possible to get 
excess heat from a light water cell. 

R. Mills, who is the originator of this particular Ni/K2CO3 experiment, has no previous 
reputation or standing as an electrochemist, calorimetrist or physicist. He rejects the 
notion of cold fusion as due to nuclear effects completely (in fact, he does not wish to 
associate himself with the cold fusion community, and does not consider his effect to be 
related in any way to cold fusion), and has developed his own theory as to why his 
experiment works; his theory is based on the proposed existence of orbitals of hydrogen 
that lie below the 1s level. An explicit assumption in the Mills and Farrell theory is that 
the electronic charge distribution in hydrogenic states consist of charged shells of 
infinitesimal thickness. In order for this proposal to be correct, quantum mechanics must 
be incorrect (which Mills believes -- he offers his theory as a replacement for quantum 
mechanics). There have been no observations of such states, and the existence of such 
states would likely not be consistent with the observed stability of atoms as atoms. 

Reproductions of the Mills experiment have been reported previously. Noninski43 
published positive results from his experiments; Noninski views his experiment as a 
verification of the work of Fleischmann and Pons, who state explicitly (in a 1989 patent 
application) the possibility of excess heat in a light water cell with Ni as a cathode 
material. Mills was apparently unaware of Fleischmann and Pons patent application and 
its relevance. 

Confirmations of the Mills light water experiment have also been reported by 
Srinivasan,44,45 and Bush and Eagleton.46 Notoya and her laboratory come with good 
reputations; her confirmation of the Mills experiment (complete with demo) is probably 
the most significant endorsement of the light water excess heat results standing. 

Notoya's demo is an open cell system. It operates at a sufficiently high excess power that 
recombination or other effects that would make an open cell system perform differently 
from a closed cell would not change the essential result even if the recombination and 
other secondary effects were taken into account incorrectly or ignored. You can put your 
finger on the tubes Notoya's demo to convince yourself that a very significant 
temperature difference occurs. This was also claimed for the Mills experiment, as well as 
for other experiments reproducing the Mills result. 

During the conference and afterwards, a virtual firestorm of controversy arose concerning 
the difference in wires that were attached to the live cell and to the blank. A student of 
Steve Jones suggested that since smaller diameter wires were used on the blank, that the 
reduced voltage drop across the resister could account for the difference. After the 
conference, Notoya replaced the offending wires, and reported essentially no difference 
in the resulting blank temperature. 

Notoya's demo was brought to the US and set up at MIT during the first week of 
December. During the day and a half before her presentation at MIT, the live cell and 
resistive blank ran at very nearly identical temperatures, consistent with no excess power 
production. Notoya attributed this to contamination of the nickel cathodes. After her visit, 
she returned to Japan and set up her demo in a laboratory in Tokyo where excess heat 
was observed. A few days later, she was back at MIT, attempting for a second time to 
demonstrate excess power production. During this visit, a temperature excess was seen 
during electrolysis of the second cathode tried. According to Notoya, the initial 
temperature differential in this case corresponded to a 100% power excess. Subsequently, 
a persistent excess of about 4E was observed, which she said corresponded to a 30% 
power excess (the reduction in fractional excess was attributed by Notoya to 
contamination). 

The persistent excess power which Notoya obtained at MIT was about 0.75 Watts, and 
the cathode volume was about 0.05 cm3, leading to a volume averaged excess of 15 
Watts/cm3. At Nagoya, the cell ran at a 4 Watt excess, corresponding to 80 Watts/cm3. 
She claims that she has observed a maximum of 200 Watts/cm3 excess. A few hours of 
operation at 15 Watts/cm3 is sufficient to defeat a chemical explanation, which was done 
at MIT. The power excess demonstrated at Nagoya would defeat a chemical explanation 
in tens of minutes, and the cell ran for many hours. 

Little is known about loading ratios (H/Ni) while heat is produced; no information is 
available about potassium loading in the Ni; there is apparently an alkaline intermetallic 
layer formed which is at least several hundred Angstroms thick which may play a role. 
Nothing is known about the temperature sensitivity of the effect; Notoya observes the 
excess power to be essentially linear in applied current down to her lowest values (50-100 
mA, and about 1 cm2 geometric area at MIT; the high current levels approach 1 amp). 

Notoya obtains her best results with cathodes which have an extremely high area ratio 
(real area to geometric area), and she uses cathodes with an area ratio of several thousand 
(and a reduced density of about 6 gm/cm3). The effect is apparently extremely sensitive 
to contamination, especially to oils. She observes an increase of 20% in calcium 
concentration (near 20 ppm) in the electrolyte, which she believes may be anomalous. 

I do not think that there is yet any particular contradiction between the light water 
experiments of the Mills type and the light water blanks in Pons-Fleischmann 
experiments. The light water blanks in Pd/H experiments run in a H2O/LiOH electrolyte 
give zero excess power in most everyone's blank experiments these days; the Mills 
experiment uses a Ni cathode with a H2O/K2CO3 electrolyte. These are really very 
different systems. In any event, in time any connections between the two systems will be 
clarified. 

Based on Notoya's work, the evidence in support of a light water effect has improved 
significantly. The effect which she observes is so great that there appears to be no simple 
explanation for it. 

So is there a light water heat effect? At this point, I am not yet sure one way or another. 
On the plus side: (1) the effect is large, (2) looks to be nuclear given the excess heat 
numbers, and (3) can be reproduced. On the minus side (from my point of view): (1) the 
effect has been studied by a relatively small number of groups for a relatively short time, 
(2) the effect appears to be somewhat insensitive to choice of electrolyte (claims41 of heat 
production have been made for experiments which have used other alkali-carbonates such 
as Li2CO3, Na2CO3 and Rb2CO3) and to some degree the choice of cathode (positive 
results were reported47 for Ni, Ag, Au and Sn electrodes). The reason which I am 
uncomfortable with the insensitivity of the effect to cathode and electrolyte comes from 
potential difficulties associated with finding a reaction mechanism that would show such 
an insensitivity. 

The experimentalists have grown used to the idea that deuterium gives anomalies and 
hydrogen does not; the theorists who believe in fusion mechanisms are comfortable with 
positive effects in deuterium and negative effects in hydrogen. A light water heat effect 
causes consternation in both camps; it would be exceedingly difficult to reconcile with a 
fusion mechanism. 

The neutron transfer model which I have been looking at (described briefly below) needs 
a neutron donor (usually deuterium) and an acceptor nucleus, and therefore has somewhat 
fewer constraints; nevertheless, I do not relish the prospect of attempting to explain an 
apparently general light water heat effect where the nuclei present are widely different 
from one cell to another. An experimental determination (and confirmation) of the ashes 
in any of these experiments would of course greatly improve the situation. 

As a result, I am not yet sure that there is a light water effect. I will be surer one way or 
another when more confirmations (or non-confirmations) are reported. I will be surer 
when Notoya, who has worked on her experiments only since last August, has had more 
time to think about her experiments and to improve them. I will also be surer in time after 
the cold fusion community has had more time to study and to evaluate the experiment. 

13. The successful production of significant excess energy must give rise to ashes of one sort 
or another. It is not currently known what reactions are occurring; consequently, it is not 
obvious what ashes are to be expected. Energy excesses in the range of 1 MJ to 10 MJ 
have been reported in several experiments; we will consider briefly the implications of 
excess power generation, both per joule and for a 10 MJ total excess. 

Conventional dd-fusion reactions producing 10 MJ would yield more than 1019 neutrons, 
and a roughly equal number of tritium atoms. Pons and Fleischmann's recent 
measurements48 of the neutrons produced from their cells yield 5-50 neutrons per joule, 
low by more than 10 orders of magnitude from what would be predicted for conventional 
dd-fusion. Tritium is not produced in their experiments, with a limit which is probably on 
the order of 104 tritium atoms per joule; low by at least 8 orders of magnitude. 

It has been suggested that the 4He branch of the dd-fusion reaction is somehow favored, 
and several searches for 4He have been made. The conventional 4He branch yields a 24 
MeV gamma, which is not observed when heat is produced. The reaction energy would 
have to go elsewhere to be qualitatively consistent, and many in the field believe that 
energy transfer to the lattice occurs. Many measurements have been performed seeking 
4He in the cathode after the experiment; my impression is that it is simply not there 
quantitatively by many orders of magnitude. 

There have been some efforts seeking 4He in the gas stream produced during electrolysis; 
Miles focused the attention of the community on this issue last year at Como when he 
claimed the observation of 4He which at its highest levels might account for roughly 10% 
of the excess energy. Scaramuzzi and De Ninno11,12 described a new cell, calorimeter 
plus helium detector with which they plan to attempt a confirmation; other groups are 
acquiring mass detection capability for similar studies. The measurements of 
Yamaguchi22,23 described above has also raised interest in helium detection. 

I would think that by next year's conference, that there will be a consensus by many 
groups established on whether substantial helium is produced or not. 

If the pragmatic point of view is adopted that whatever reaction is occurring is not 
constrained by theoretical preconceptions, then the search for the ashes is generalized 
considerably to include possible isotopic shifts or anomalies, and the possible production 
of elements or isotopes not initially present. 

A large number of studies have been reported at the international conferences in which 
the cathode surface has been analyzed for the presence of trace elements. Due to the 
nature of electrochemical deposition in real systems, quite a long list of surface 
contaminants are found at significant levels, hopelessly complicating any straightforward 
ab initio experimental search. 

The number of nuclei which is sought is on the order of 1012 per joule (or 1019 per MJ), 
which either helps or hurts depending on the point of view. Present in large quantities are 
D, O, Pd, Li, and H. Determining a relative isotope shift between deuterium and 
hydrogen is generally deemed not to be feasible, given the presence of hydrogen as a 
ubiquitous universal contaminant. Isotope shifts in oxygen are not currently predicted by 
anyone in the field, and have never been studied in Pons-Fleischmann experiments to my 
knowledge. 

The first serious claim of possible isotope shifts in heavy elements with which I am 
familiar was made by Rollison at the NSF/EPRI workshop in 1989 (Rollison 
subsequently had to back down from her claim -- see the proceedings of the Salt Lake 
City conference). The glow discharge observations described by Kucherov13-16 and the 
Chinese group17-20 imply isotope shifts in Pd and other metals. 

The production of 10 MJ of energy in a Pd cathode (containing 0.1 mole of Pd) would 
give rise to modifications of the Pd isotope distributions (assuming Pd were fuel) at the 
0.0002 level, assuming arbitrarily 5 MeV per reaction. The prospect of proving this 
experimentally if it is in the bulk is judged to be impractical. If the reactions occur near 
the surface, then the numbers improve; the “noise” associated with natural isotopic 
separation also increases. Searches for such surface isotope shifts have been reported, and 
continue to be performed; such searches for now remain in the background of the field. 

Lithium appears to be required for heat production in Pons-Fleischmann experiments, 
although it is unknown whether it plays any nuclear role. 

Thompson, formerly of Johnson-Matthey, reported49 that the lithium on the surface of a 
Pons-Fleischmann cathode that had been involved in heat-producing experiments showed 
a depletion of 6Li relative to the natural abundance (down to about 4%). Pons and 
Fleischmann had reported (in the Salt Lake proceedings) that the lithium which they had 
used was initially enriched in 6Li (11%); Thompson noted this in his talk, quoting an 
initial concentration of 9-11%, but said the Johnson-Matthey group did not have a before 
to compare with their after. 

During the questions following Thompson's talk, McKubre noted that the Johnson-
Matthey analysis only looked at the surface, and that any lithium present in the bulk 
might provide an internal reference. Thompson said that he thought that this suggestion 
could be tested. The conference proceedings from Johnson-Matthey states that no lithium 
is detected in the bulk,50 which would imply that it will not be possible to establish an 
internal reference retrospectively. 

The amount of lithium present in a cathode is an interesting question. Gozzi reported last 
year the results of studies to determine Li loading in Pd during electrolysis, and found the 
very high number of 5% by monitoring the Li lost from the electrolyte. I questioned him 
at the conference (he presented50 some nice positive results from his torus of cells where 
he monitors for heat, neutrons, tritium, helium, and I think gammas; unfortunately, I am 
lacking sufficient documentation of his results to present more details in this review), 
since several papers presented at each of the international conferences showed per cent 
level surface concentrations which fall rapidly on the micron scale into the bulk of the 
cathode (an exception to this was the measurements presented by Nakada51 et al showing 
lithium profiles with significant lithium in 20-30 microns). Lithium concentrations were 
measured by Myamoto et al,52,53 who obtain Li/Pd ratios between 3 H 10-4 and 3 H 10-3. I 
suspect that the Li/Pd ratio is probably sensitive to cathode properties, to the 
electrochemistry and loading time; one possible explanation of the long loading time 
required for Pons-Fleischmann cells, and remarked on explicitly by McKubre,2 was that 
extra time beyond the deuterium loading time required to see the heat effect might be due 
to a necessity to achieve significant loading of another species, such as lithium or other 
light interstitials. 

I note here that energy production at the level of 100 MJ/mol would yield an observable 
(2%) isotope shift in lithium if the lithium concentration were at the 1% level, and if the 
bulk lithium did not substitute with lithium in the electrolyte. The numbers are worse if 
the electrolyte lithium is included, but not so bad to prohibit a measurement. 

Unfortunately, very few groups are currently pursuing the lithium isotope shift problem; I 
consider it to be an important question, especially in light of the initial Johnson-Matthey 
positive measurement. 

14. B. Stella54 presented a poster that I passed by twice; the title talks about the “stimulated 
emission of neutrons,” that is of course impossible -- neutrons are fermions, and can of 
course not participate in stimulated emission. The third time by, Stella grabbed me and 
walked me through his poster (for which I am thankful, otherwise I would have missed 
it). 

In essence what the experiment consists of is taking a Pons-Fleischmann cell, putting it 
inside a 40 % efficient neutron detector underground in the Gran Sasso INFN laboratory, 
and directing an incident neutron beam (of about 30 neutrons/sec) with a substantial 
thermal component at the cell. Fast (2.45 MeV) neutrons are measured originating from 
the cell, and a gain of about 2 fast neutrons for every incident neutron is claimed. 

After talking to him, I was given to understand that for 30 neutrons/sec input that 60 or 
more neutrons/sec were measured (taking into account the neutron detector efficiency). I 
asked if the ratio held up at a higher input flux, and he said that they had done 
experiments up at 500/sec incident, with the same basic neutron gain (but that their 
neutron detector suffered from saturation problems at such a high flux). 

I asked whether the effect was reproducible. Stella said that they had done two runs (each 
run takes about a week to do) so far, and that they hoped to be able to do some more in 
the near future. 

I note that a neutron gain of 2 would be a very important result, if true, with rather 
important implications. I note also that this report of two observations (with a modest 
signal relative to noise) is the first in which such an effect has been claimed, and that no 
reproductions from either this group or any other group has been made. 


Negative Results 

1. A famous hydrogen-in-metals physicist, Y. Fukai, gave a presentation of the basic 
problems facing theorists attempting to provide an explanation of the anomalies.55,56 I 
thought that this talk was excellent, and Fukai is really very knowledgeable; it is clear 
that the basic physics issues (the Coulomb barrier, screening, and solid state issues) that 
he discussed must be addressed theoretically, especially in the case of theories based on 
fusion reaction mechanisms. 

Fukai also presented a negative result57 involving a search for neutrons that might be 
induced as a result of the generation of fractures in metal deuterides. The highest result 
observed was for fractured TiD, 1.8 " 0.1 cpm, versus a background of 1.27 " 0.05 cpm. 

I was impressed that he attended, since I am convinced that mainline scientists of his 
caliber will play an increasingly important role in the field. After talking to him, it 
became clear that some scientists present who were not in the field had received very 
strong encouragement to participate. 

His talk was not well received by a number of those in the field, and he was criticized 
during and after his presentation. 

2. There was a negative result on a measurement of neutrons from a Pons-Fleischmann cell 
originating out of the physics department at Osaka University,58 the poster of which 
looked very interesting. The group had a high-resolution Ge detector looking at gammas 
produced inelastically by neutrons impinging on an Fe plate placed between the detector 
and a Pd heavy water electrolysis cell. With this system, the group was able to place an 
upper limit of 1.6 H 10-24 fusions/dd-pair. 

There was another negative result on the fusion rate as determined by the relative absence 
of 3 MeV protons reported by a group from Tokyo Metropolitan University.59 I did not 
see this poster. According to the abstract, the upper limit on the fusion rate from this 
measurement was 1.3 H 10-24 fusions/dd-pair. 

3. D. Morrison of CERN presented a paper60 that criticized the experiments in the field, and 
used data from an analysis of the literature published in the field to show that interest in 
the field is declining, symptomatic of “pathological science”. 

Morrison made a number of arguments, most of which are restated and amplified in his 
recent review61 of the Nagoya conference (his Cold Fusion Update No. 7 on the computer 
network; my copy is dated 12-17-92). I will attempt here to summarize briefly what I 
think are key points (drawing from his conclusions listed in Update No. 7), and to 
provide some commentary on the points. 

The major point of Morrison's presentation involves the inconsistency between the 
claimed excess heat production, which would correspond to on the order of 1012 reactions 
per second, and the low tritium and neutron signals which are lower by many orders of 
magnitude. For example, Morrison uses the upper limit on neutron emission in the 
Kamiokande experiments (10-4 neutrons/sec) to place an upper limit on heat production 
which is lower by 16 orders of magnitude. Morrison also noted that the mean distance 
between deuterons in the lattice is larger than for D2, which implies that fusion reaction 
rates in a lattice would be expected to be smaller than the very low numbers which are 
well-known for D2. 

A weakness of the limiting argument as stated by Morrison is the presupposition that 
conventional dd-fusion is the operative reaction mechanism; it has long been recognized 
by many (but not all) in the field that the excess heat production can not be due to 
conventional dd-fusion. I personally would accept Morrison's limit on the heat production 
for the Kamiokande cells, specifically for the amount of excess heat due to the 
conventional dd-fusion channel in those experiments. Possibly more relevant for a limit 
on the dd-fusion channel would be a neutron measurement in a heat-producing cell (there 
is no report of any calorimetric excess heat production at Kamiokande), in which case the 
limit claimed in other experiments is higher, but the basic argument is unchanged. This 
issue has been discussed above. 

Morrison advocates that due to the wide range of phenomena claimed (some inconsistent 
with others), and since “poorly designed and artifact-prone” experiments have been 
reported in the field, that only “good fully-instrumented and fully-calibrated experiments 
that need few and unimportant corrections” should be done; loading should always be 
measured. 

The claims of positive heat results in light water experiments appears to be inconsistent 
with previous claims of heat production (in which the effect was present in heavy water, 
and absent in light water). This issue was commented on above. 

Morrison points out that many negative results have been obtained which contradict the 
claims of Pons and Fleischmann, and those of Jones. Morrison points to the work of the 
GE group (R. H. Wilson et al, J. Electroanal. Chem. 332, 1 (1992)), as well as a large 
number of other experiments, in which no excess heat was observed in contrast to the 
claims of Pons and Fleischmann. He points to the Kamiokande experiment as the 
strongest refutation of the original claims of neutron emission by Jones and coworkers. 

This argument was presented by Morrison in a spirited fashion at the conference. He 
made use of the statistics of papers published for and against, seemingly as a route to help 
to decide whether an effect exists or not. For example, of 727 refereed published papers 
in the compilation of D. Britz, in each category of effect, there are more negative results 
than positive results. Of experimental papers in this set, there appear 86 positive, 136 
null, and 36 indecisive or contradictory. 

Of the 8 experimental papers published in 1992 included in the Britz compilation, 1 was 
positive, 6 nulls, 1 indecisive; of papers on proton measurements, 1 positive, and 11 
nulls; of papers on 3He, 1 positive and 8 nulls; of papers on x-ray emission, 0 positives 
and 7 nulls. The subset which Britz rates as being expert yields the results as: 1 positive, 
19 null, 2 unclear and 6 technical; of those looking for artifacts: 1 positive, 14 null, 2 
unclear, and 1 technical. 

At issue in Morrison's discussion is whether there occur, or do not occur anomalies (heat, 
particles, etc.) in deuterated metal systems. Taking a vote by counting the number of 
published papers pro or con is certainly one way of deciding the issue; most others at the 
conference who argued for or against presented the results of an experiment or else the 
results of a theoretical model. 

Morrison went further at the conference; he used the results to support his contention that 
interest in the field is dying out (experimental papers: 72 in 1989, 128 in 1990, 48 in 
1991 and 8 in 1992), which he said was symptomatic of “pathological science”. Although 
Morrison has written about the field as an example of pathological science Special 
Symposium Proceedings on Cold Fusion of the World Hydrogen Energy Conference, 
July 1990, p. 233), and he discussed pathological science at Nagoya, I did not see an 
elaboration of his arguments in his review. 

Whether the excess heat effect is real or not is a matter that either has been, or else will 
be, settled by experiment; not by counting papers or by discussing pathological science. 
Nevertheless, there is an issue buried in Morrison's arguments which is of interest. The 
issue of reproducibility is central in the field, especially given the early history and 
associated problems. The dark clouds which currently hang over the field today would 
likely not be present had the experiments been easier to reproduce in 1989. While the 
degree of reproducibility of the heat effect among groups working in the field has 
improved considerably since 1989, it is true that not very many examples exist where an 
outside effort has come back recently armed with the latest results and has attempted a 
replication. This situation needs to be addressed in the coming months and years. 

4. J. Huizenga of the University of Rochester submitted a post deadline abstract62 that 
pointed out that there are two types of claims, one for heat and one for low levels of 
neutrons. Huizenga maintains that there is no evidence to support any relation between 
the two claims. The claims of fusion products at a level down by twelve orders of 
magnitude from the heat production do not support the notion that the heat is of nuclear 
origin. 

Although Huizenga was present, this paper was not presented. 


Theory Papers 

All but four of the theory papers were presented as posters during two sessions where I 
had posters to attend; consequently I was unable to spend much time looking over the theory 
papers of others. I will nevertheless attempt a summary of some of the approaches of the work 
based both on the abstracts and on what I have seen of the approaches previously. Once again, I 
warn the reader that my review of the theory papers in the field are biased by my own point of 
view as to what physical mechanisms are responsible for the effects being observed. 

The theories may initially be divided up into two general categories; those involving 
(modified) fusion mechanisms, and those not involving fusion mechanisms. Papers considering 
fusion mechanisms face the two basic problems of (1) arranging to get nuclei close enough 
together to fuse, and (2) possibly modifying the fusion reaction profiles. We first consider papers 
describing theories based on fusion mechanisms. 

1. G. Preparata63 has been working on theory for coherent dd-fusion reactions; a major goal 
of the theory is to account for the heat production by a modified dd-fusion reaction where 
the 4He branch dominates, and the gamma emission is replaced by energy transfer with 
the lattice. He argues that a proper quantization of the low energy electromagnetic field 
coupled to the metal electrons leads to enhanced screening between deuterons. He then 
proposes that the 4He branch is favored by coherence factors that come about when the 
reaction energy (24 MeV) is transferred to the lattice. 

In some sense, this is a version of the “classical” cold fusion model, which would be 
essentially forced somehow to be true if Fleischmann's initial conjecture that the effect 
was due to fusion were accepted. I consider this general type of model to be essentially 
the only game in town if it is assumed (following Fleischmann's initial conjecture) that 
the reaction mechanism must be fusion. I spent 6 months working on it myself in 1989. 

However, none of this makes the fundamental problems associated with screening and 
modification of reaction pathways any easier to solve. 

2. There have been a number of speculative theories that have been based on the notion that 
deuterons in a metal are well-described using Bloch-type wavefunctions. In such case, the 
principal interaction of the deuteron is assumed to be with the lattice, and deuteron-
deuteron correlation effects would be brought in at higher order. A computation of the 
dd-fusion rate using uncorrelated orbitals yields anomalously high fusion rates, as 
expected since it operationally leaves out the Gamow factor. 

It has been suggested that the inclusion of the deuteron-deuteron correlation terms might 
not lead to Gamow factors as low as in the well-known case of molecular D2. S. Chubb 
and T. Chubb64,65 have recently turned to the problem of electron correlation in ground 
state helium as an example where orbital and correlation effects compete, and argue that 
the Hylleraas solutions show an unexpected degree of overlap between the two electrons. 

Multi-body fusion theories have been proposed,66,67 that would ultimately require 
deuteron-deuteron correlation to be essentially absent altogether to operate. It is not clear 
how this could come about. 

3. The possibility that anomalously large electron screening might occur is the subject of a 
number of works presented at the conference.68-71 The basic idea is that if the coulomb 
repulsion between deuterons held in neighboring sites was reduced, then the degree of 
overlap of the nuclei would be increased, leading to a possibly measurable fusion rate. 
The difficulty here is to arrange for an enormous enhancement (of some unexpected sort) 
of screening in the metal beyond what screening occurs in D2. 

4. Fast (multi-KeV) deuterons are able to overcome the coulomb barrier sufficiently to fuse 
with a low but observable probability. There have been suggestions that conventional 
mechanisms exist that could accelerate enough deuterons fast enough to account for low 
levels of neutron emission that have been reported. This explanation follows from the 
known phenomenon in insulators that hundred eV ions are emitted from insulators that 
undergo intense fractures; the corresponding effect is much weaker in metals by several 
orders of magnitude. 

Theories which propose anomalous ion acceleration in metal hydrides were described in a 
number of abstracts.72-75 A variant on this general approach is discussed by Fukushima,76 
wherein recent observations of conditions in sono-luminescence experiments are 
proposed to result in an enhancement of the fusion rate. 

5. Kim and coworkers examine screening effects and modifications of the deuteron velocity 
distribution function that may occur at high density.77-79 This approach is applicable both 
to cold fusion and to hot fusion problems; the authors believe that it may provide a 
solution to the solar neutrino problem. The fusion rate may be higher or lower than the 
conventionally calculated rate, depending on the condensed matter environment. Kim 
believes that these effects may also help to account for the anomalous branching ratio in 
cold fusion. 

6. A low energy resonance in the D+D system would enhance the fusion rate at low energy 
(no such resonance is known theoretically or experimentally). An abstract was submitted 
describing a proposed novel “combined resonance tunneling” effect,80 that was not 
explained in the abstract. 

7. The catalysis of fusion by a heavy negatively charged particle, extending the essence of 
muon-catalyzed fusion, was made popular in 1989 by Rafelski and others. An abstract on 
catalysis by an anti-diquark with -4/3 charge was submitted.81 From my perspective, this 
general approach suffers from the absence of abundant known massive negatively 
charged nuclear particles, and a reason why they should be appearing specifically in 
Pons-Fleischmann type experiments. 

8. V. A. Tsarev of the Lebedev Institute in Moscow described some calculations suggesting 
that an increase in the tunneling probability between deuterons would be expected due to 
lattice motion (my translation of “violation of stationarity in lattice”).82 Rather than the 
conventional kinetic or screening arguments often described, Tsarev proposed that the 
lattice would provide a time-dependent potential that would affect the deuteron 
wavefunction itself. 

I cannot see how there would be any but the weakest of effects from such terms; in time 
more documentation of this approach will hopefully be available, and the essence of the 
proposal will become clearer. 

Tsarev presented an interesting review of cold fusion research in Russia and in 
neighboring countries formerly of the Soviet Union. I do not have sufficient 
documentation (unfortunately) of his presentation to include a section in this review. I 
note that the Russian work was reviewed last year in an article by Tsarev and Worledge. 

A number of theorists, including myself, have gone away from fusion reaction 
mechanisms. The motivation for this is to avoid the coulomb barrier (if possible) and to find 
reactions with signatures that hopefully more closely match the experimental observations. Each 
new non-fusion approach carries with it specific problems and issues that are associated with the 
specific reaction mechanism. Aside from this, any new approach must also arrange itself to be 
consistent with physical law, observations in this and other fields, and must presumably be 
functioning in a manner not previously expected (lest it would have been found earlier). We 
describe such contributions below. 

1. Electron capture on a deuteron would lead to two virtual neutrons; if it could be arranged 
for the virtual neutrons to be in proximity with neighboring nuclei, then further reactions 
could occur. This approach was described in two abstracts by J. Yang of the Dept. of 
Physics, Hunan Normal University of China.84,85 Yang proposes that the two neutrons 
form a stable dineutron that reacts with deuterium to make tritium and a free neutron, and 
with 105Pd to make 106Pd and a free neutron. 

I consider this general approach to be one of the basic non-fusion approaches that 
actually begins to try to address the coulomb barrier problem. Once the electron capture 
occurs, the coulomb barrier is gone, potentially leading to the possibility of something 
happening near room temperature. One difficulty involved in this approach are that the 
electron capture is mediated by the weak interaction, which really is very weak, making it 
hard to obtain significant reaction rates. A second difficulty is that virtual neutrons do not 
generally wander more than fermis away from their point of origin, making it difficult for 
a virtual neutron to reach another nucleus to interact. 

2. Direct lattice-induced neutron ionization was described by Tani and Kobayashi,86 
motivated by the broad neutron emission that has been observed by several laboratories at 
energies higher than 2.45 MeV. 

The possibility that sufficient energy may be transferred from the lattice to a deuteron to 
disintegrate it is yet another significant conceptual step away from working with fusion 
reaction mechanisms. If a mechanism existed to do what Tani and Kobayashi proposes, 
the resulting spectra would likely follow the photodisintegration cross section generally 
qualitatively in shape, which would not be such a bad match to Takahashi's data. 

Once, I suspected that a single-step lattice-induced disintegration, something like what is 
described in this abstract, might be possible; I followed it up with a moderately 
sophisticated calculation (based on a harmonic lattice, without including some of the 
effects described in the abstract) that has been accepted for publication. The results of my 
computation were that although it is possible in principle to transfer sufficient energy to 
do the job, the energy transfer is sensitive to sign; in the end, I concluded that single-step 
lattice-induced disintegration could not be done (within the limits of my model), without 
having individual nuclei with MeV-level kinetic energy in the lattice initially to do the 
ionizing. 

3. I submitted two abstracts on neutron transfer reaction mechanisms that I have been 
exploring recently.87-89 The basic reaction in this theory is a two-step transfer reaction of 
a neutron from a donor nucleus (typically a deuteron) to an acceptor nucleus located 
Angstroms to microns away. As originally proposed, the lattice would contribute the 
energy to promote the neutron from the donor, and take up energy at the acceptor; 
calculations showed that this was not viable, and so a modified version of the model in 
under development. 

The revised model works similarly, except that the intermediate state is virtual, as 
required since the lattice is unable to contribute energy to ionize the neutron. When the 
neutron reaches the acceptor nucleus, then a number of incoherent processes could occur, 
including gamma capture, and capture to states that decay by alpha emission. There 
might be a correlation between these decay products and the reaction products observed 
by Kucherov. Alpha particles in this model would range up to 4.1 MeV (originating from 
neutron capture on 105Pd). 

Heat production might be accounted for if a long-lived metastable state existed that was 
nearly resonant with the virtual neutron, and which alpha decayed. 

If the capture at the acceptor is preceded by energy transfer to the lattice during the donor 
transfer (which has now been shown explicitly to be allowed at least mathematically), or 
during scattering of the intermediate state virtual neutron, then the coherent neutron 
capture proceeds into long-lived ground state nuclei, which are born essentially at rest. 
This mechanism could account for heat production (accepting onto light interstitials such 
as 6Li or 10B) and anomalous slow tritium production (accepting onto deuterium). 

The primary difficulty with any reaction mechanism that involves a virtual free particle is 
that such intermediate particles do not go very far (typically fermis) from where they are 
born. I presented the results of computations of the virtual neutron Green's function 
including lattice effects,88 and found that under conditions that phase coherence among 
neighboring hydrogen isotopes is maintained in a periodic lattice, that a usefully large 
and long-range contribution to the Green's function may occur that would lead to 
observably large net reaction rates. Quantum diffusion is conjectured to be able to set up 
the required coherence. 

One weakness of the approach which has become apparent following the conference is 
that the diffusion of hydrogen in metals generally proceeds by a hopping mechanism, 
which would likely not establish phase coherence of the sort required by the theory. In a 
loaded PdD lattice, some population of the tetrahedral sites would be expected; this is of 
interest since the tetrahedral to tetrahedral site barrier is expected to be considerably 
lower than the octahedral to octahedral site barrier, which might help the situation. The 
issue of coherence for such a diffusion mechanism is under study. 


What Was Not Presented 

In spite of the relatively numerous set of papers that were presented at ICCF3, there were 
several key players in the field who were not present or did not give papers. I felt that the 
conference suffered from the absence of K. Wolf, H. Menlove, E. Storms, E. Cecil, F. Will, S. 
Szpak, F. Lanza, and several other key players in the field. Additionally, a paper from G. 
Chambers (of NRL) that I had hoped to see was withdrawn by order of the associate director of 
NRL. 

Possibly controversial was the absence of a presentation by Ishida of experiments at 
Kamiokande. During the past year and a half, a very large number of measurements seeking 
neutrons from various cold fusion experiments were carried out. Kamiokande is famous as one 
of the world's premier neutrino detection facilities, and received considerable attention following 
the observation of neutrinos from the 1987 supernova. A positive result of observation of 
anomalous neutron emission at Kamiokande would be a very big event, since Kamiokande is 
well-respected in the physics community. 

Ishida's master thesis summarizes the results of over 100 cold fusion experiments that 
were done at Kamiokande. Although it is a fact that neutrons were observed at low levels, there 
are questions about what is the origin of the neutrons. In the thesis, Ishida proposes that the 
neutrons are due to naturally occurring radioactive contaminants. 

In the end, I think that the results from Kamiokande make either a weak case in support 
of the existence of anomalous neutron emission, or else a possibly disputable case in support of 
the non-existence of an effect. This requires further explanation. The emission of neutrons from 
Ti shavings in deuterium gas was reported early on by Scaramuzzi from Frascati. Attempts to 
replicate the experiment met with success at LANL, where both random and large bursts of 
neutrons have been observed with high efficiency 3He neutron detectors. Low level random 
emission of neutrons is claimed, and bursts of up to several hundred neutrons in a 100 mu sec 
period were observed. The reproducibility of these experiments is not great, and in spite of the 
progress made at LANL in improving the reproducibility of the effect, the success rate reported 
in the Como proceedings was about 10%. 

Menlove worked with the Japanese team to attempt a confirmation of the LANL results. 
Due to the constraints imposed by the nature of the facility, the number of runs which were 
attempted on Menlove's samples were 6. According to Menlove, one of these samples might 
have shown something. If a case were then to be made that the Kamiokande results disprove the 
Menlove's observations at LANL, this argument is at best weak, since the probability of 
obtaining a null result is on the order of (0.9)6 = 0.53 for these experiments. 

Some have made the case that since no very large bursts (- 100 neutrons) were observed 
in any of the more than 100 experiments (which would improve the statistics), that this refutes 
Menlove's positive observations of large burst obtained at LANL and reported at Como. Lacking 
from this argument is an estimate of expected frequency of bursts from the various experiments 
that were done. If the expected rate of large neutron bursts were negligible in the Portland 
cement experiments, for example, then doing many of them should not alter a conclusion 
regarding a Menlove experiment. 

The poor reproducibility of the effect, in addition to the difficulty of determining in a 
post-analysis what is the difference between a cell that gave a signal and one that did not, 
prompted Scaramuzzi to recommend at Como that this line of investigation should make way for 
other approaches which are less frustrating. Research on Frascati cells has largely ceased in the 
field. 

The Kamiokande experiments were discussed in the talk by S. Jones,90 who was a 
collaborator in the experiments at Kamiokande. Jones argued that the conjectures made by Ishida 
about radioactive contaminants had been subsequently tested by introducing the proposed 
contaminants and measuring the resulting signals elsewhere; the resulting neutron emissions did 
not agree with the Kamiokande results. Jones therefore described the results as supporting the 
presence of anomalous neutron emission. 

I do not think that we have heard the last of this discussion. I would hope that in the 
future Kamiokande would try again, perhaps with experiments which have larger signals and 
higher success rates. For example, the experiment described by Kucherov would yield signals up 
to eight or nine orders of magnitude above background at Kamiokande if there were any way to 
field it there. 

Also absent from the conference were prominent US skeptics who have in one way or 
another have made technical contributions to the field in the past. The absence of such 
individuals indicates the lack of any significant respect that the cold fusion field currently has 
among the scientific community. I would have been interested in the response of such skeptics 
following many of the papers presented at the conference; but alas, it was not to be. At the 
conference, little in the way of substantive technical criticism of the best heavy water calorimetry 
results was offered by any of the participants. If there exist skeptics who are familiar with the 
Pons and Fleischmann calorimetry or the SRI work and believe that they know what might be 
technically in error, your technical input would be greatly appreciated. 


Conclusions And Discussion 

Was the conference sufficiently strong technically to turn the tide, to settle the seemingly 
endless controversy as to whether there is or is not any new anomalous effect? I thought that it 
was. I regard the technical issue of whether there is a reproducible anomalous excess power 
effect in heavy water Pons-Fleischmann experiments to have been settled at this point; I think 
that there is clearly an effect. 

For such a significant conference, it has been largely ignored by the scientific 
community. Wrongly so, I think. The majority of scientists are currently ill-informed of the 
experiments, the implications, the arguments, or the goals of ongoing research in the field. At 
some point this needs to change, but I confess that I do not see how it might happen in the 
foreseeable future. 

The name “cold fusion” has been adopted by the field to some degree by default. This 
name implies a generic physical reaction mechanism (fusion), and because the experiments 
involve deuterium, the name further presupposes specific reactions (dd-fusion reactions). But dd-
fusion is expected to produce neutrons and tritons, neither of which are quantitatively present 
with the excess heat. Scientists who are not in the field are discouraged because the expected 
fusion products are not present in quantities commensurate with the observed energy production, 
and scientists working in the field have not come up with an explanation in three and a half years 
as to why deuterons should fuse that is acceptable to the scientific community. 

There have been proposals to change the name of the field: “solid state nuclear physics” 
has been suggested; “nuclear effects in metals” has also been put forth. I would strongly endorse 
a name change. 

A reviewer of this manuscript has pointed out that even these names presuppose a nuclear 
component to the effect, which in the reviewer's eyes remains to be demonstrated, and has 
recommended “hydrogen energy” or “hydrogen in metals”, with the understanding that 
“hydrogen” is to include the isotopes. 

The field continues to receive considerable bad press, which at this point is not 
warranted. For example, I have recently obtained a copy of a review of the Nagoya conference 
by D. O. Morrison, which has received very wide distribution; it is unfortunate that the only 
updates about the field received by most of the physics community is through such a biased 
channel. This simply must change. I am open to suggestions as to how this situation could best 
be changed. 

There are precious few sources of potential funding in this area, especially in the US. I 
am convinced that DOE should be funding a significant effort in the US, the goal of which 
should be to find out what is going on, so that an informed and rational judgement can be made 
about any potential of the effect to meet US and world energy requirements. One basic claim that 
has been made is that excess energy at a level which must be nuclear (but is certainly not 
conventional dd-fusion) is observed in the Pons-Fleischmann experiment and variants; this is 
something that the DOE should be interested in. 

So what is it that should be done? The list is very long, but I will attempt to enumerate 
some of what I think are a few relevant goals: 

1. Verification of a heat effect: I am convinced that the Pons-Fleischmann cells can produce 
excess energy of a nuclear origin based on the amount of energy per atom evolved. The 
scientific community does not accept this. This issue really needs to be put to rest, and 
the associated controversy ended. 

Pons and Fleischmann have been publishing further details of their own work in refereed 
journals and in readily available conference proceedings, and more papers are currently 
in the pipeline. Details of the work of many other groups is also readily available. 

Considerably more is known about the Pons-Fleischmann cells than in 1989, and the 
reproducibility of the effect has been improved considerably. SRI has produced 
documentation of criterion which, if met, carries the guarantee that similar experiments at 
SRI have produced heat reproducibly with a very high success rate. Palladium cathodes 
from sources other than Matthey-Johnson have now shown the effect. 

Significant deficiencies have been identified in the principal negative experiments which 
were done in 1989; the main criticisms of these experiments was that a high loading was 
not achieved and held. For example, the method developed at SRI requires very high 
loading (D/Pd ratio near 0.90) to be maintained for about a week. Since positive results 
have been obtained at lower loadings, this constraint is likely not to be absolute; 
nevertheless, many in the field believe that quite high loadings do improve the 
reproducibility of the effect. 

I do not know how this controversy is to be ended, but I know that it does need to be 
ended in a satisfactory manner. The basic experiments have been done, they have been 
repeated in many different ways by numerous groups, and the effect is observed with 
considerably better signal to noise ratio than in 1989. 

Scientists in the field have gone to extremes in attempts to satisfy skeptics. Cells were 
stirred, blanks were done, extremely elaborate closed cell calorimeters have been 
developed (in which the effect has been demonstrated), the signal to noise ratio has been 
improved so that positive results can now be claimed at the 50 sigma level, the 
reproducibility issue has been laid to rest; but still it is not enough. I have heard some 
skeptics saying that a commercial product is the next hurdle to be jumped through before 
any significant funding can be justified. This is simply not right. 

2. Basic reaction mechanisms for heat production: To date the claims of the observation of 
heat anomalies in metal deuterides have not been accompanied by any clear positive 
evidence for reaction mechanisms. Anomalous heat generation would have to have a fuel, 
and would have to have ashes; the confirmed identification of either fuel or ashes would 
help tremendously towards a determination of a reaction mechanism. 

I think that progress in this field is hindered by the absence of even a rudimentary 
understanding of the basic reaction mechanisms involved (there are of course theories, 
but to date there is no positive experimental confirmation of any proposed theory). At 
some point, the principal experimentalists in the field simply must take this issue 
seriously. Having an understanding of what the reaction mechanisms are would provide 
numerous benefits: (1) guidance as to what experimental parameters are expected to be 
important for optimizing reaction rates; (2) improvement of the general quality of the 
science being done in the field, especially as perceived by those not in the field; (3) 
allows those working in the field to focus more clearly on the issues that are most 
important. From the point of view of funders or potential funders, a knowledge of how 
the effect works allows the possibility of assessing more accurately potential future 
applications. 

The determination of fuel and ashes requires high sustained volume-averaged heat 
production. In the case of 4He production, an assay of the gas stream is required; in the 
case of assays for other elements and isotopes, careful mass spectroscopy (and the 
presence of a small electrolyte volume) will likely prove to be most important. 

3. Verification and reaction mechanisms for other anomalies: Quite a few anomalies have 
by now been associated with deuterium in metals experiments, including observations of 
neutrons, gammas, fast ions, tritium, and helium production. 

None of these effects are currently accepted by the scientific community; as in the case of 
the heat effect, some way is needed to arrange for a consensus as to which of the effects 
are real. It would seem to me that the most dramatic claims come from the glow 
discharge experiments; most significant would be if these experiments could be further 
reproduced and verified. 

I think that experiments which produce energetic (MeV-level) nuclear products provide 
essential information relevant to the issue of reaction mechanisms. For example, a 
confirmation of significant isotope shifts and strong gamma emission from heavy 
elements would place very strong constraints on proposed reaction mechanisms. A 
detailed study of precisely which gamma lines are produced would likely shed light on 
how the gamma lines are excited, which provides further input on reaction mechanisms. 


References 

M. Fleischmann and S. Pons, “Excess enthalpy generation in the region of the boiling 
point in Pd-type cathodes polarized in D2O,” paper 24-PII-14. 
M. Fleischmann and S. Pons, “Calorimetry of the Pd-D2O system: from simplicity via 
complications to simplicity,” preprint of the ICCF3 proceedings. 
M. C. H. McKubre, S. Crouch-Baker, A. M. Riley, R. C. Rocha-Filho, S. I. Smedley and 
F. L. Tanzella, “Excess power production in D2O electrolysis cells: A comparison of 
results from differing cell designs,” paper 22-PII-25. 
M. C. H. McKubre, S. Crouch-Baker, A. M. Riley, R. C. Rocha-Filho, S. I. Smedley and 
F. L. Tanzella, “Excess power observations in the electrochemical studies of the D/Pd 
system; the influence of loading,” preprint of the ICCF3 proceedings. 
K. Kunimatsu, “Deuterium loading ratio and excess heat generation during electrolysis of 
heavy water by a palladium cathode in a closed cell using a partially immersed fuel cell 
anode,” paper 22-PII-27. 
K. Kunimatsu, N. Hasegawa, A. Kubota, N. Imai, M. Ishikawa, H. Akita and Y. 
Tsuchida, “Deuterium loading ratio and excess heat generation during electrolysis of 
heavy water by a palladium cathode in a closed cell using a partially immersed fuel cell 
anode,” preprint of the ICCF3 proceedings. 
N. Hasegawa, K. Kunimatsu, T. Ohi, T. Terasawa, “Observation of excess heat during 
electrolysis of 1 M LiOD in a fuel cell type closed cell,” paper 24-PII-19. 
N. Hasegawa, K. Kunimatsu, T. Ohi, T. Terasawa, “Observation of excess heat during 
electrolysis of 1 M LiOD in a fuel cell type closed cell,” preprint of the ICCF3 
proceedings. 
A. Kubota, H. Akita, Y. Tsuchida, T. Saito, A. Kubota, N. Hasegawa, N. Imai, N. 
Hayakawa and K. Kunimatsu, “Hydrogen and deuterium absorption by Pd cathode in a 
fuel-cell type closed cell,” paper 22-PII-8. 
T. Nakata, Y. Tsuchida, K. Kunimatsu, “Absorption of hydrogen into Pd foil electrode: 
effect of Thiourea,” paper 22-PII-9. 
L. Bertalot, F. DeMarco, A. De Ninno, A. La Barbera, F. Scaramuzzi, V. Violante, P. 
Zeppa, “Study of the deuterium charging in palladium by the electrolysis of heavy water: 
search for heat excess and nuclear ashes,” paper 24-PII-21. 
L. Bertalot, F. DeMarco, A. De Ninno, A. La Barbera, F. Scaramuzzi, V. Violante, P. 
Zeppa, “Study of deuterium charging in palladium by the electrolysis of heavy water: 
search for heat excess and nuclear ashes,” preprint of the ICCF3 proceedings. 
A. B. Karabut, Ya. R. Kucherov, I. B. Savvatimova, “Experimentally defined ratio of 
nuclear reaction products flows intensity at glow discharge in deuterium,” paper 22-PII-
A. B. Karabut, Ya. R. Kucherov, I. B. Savvatimova, “Gamma spectroscopy at glow 
discharge in deuterium,”  paper 24-PI-15. 
A. B. Karabut, Ya. R. Kucherov, I. B. Savvatimova, “Heavy charged particles 
registration at glow discharge in deuterium,” paper 24-PII-7. 
A. B. Karabut, Ya. R. Kucherov, I. B. Savvatimova, “Nuclear product ratio for glow 
discharge in deuterium,”  Phys. Lett. A 170 265 (1992). 
L. Heqing, X. Renshou, S. Sihai, L. Hongquan, G. Jimbang, C. Bairong, “The anomalous 
effects induced by the dynamic low pressure gas discharge in a deuterium/palladium 
system,” paper 24-PI-3. 
L. Heqing, X. Renshou, S. Sihai, L. Hongquan, G. Jimbang, C. Bairong,  “The anomalous 
effects induced by the dynamic low pressure gas discharge in a deuterium/palladium 
system,”  preprint of the ICCF3 proceedings. 
L. Heqing, S. Sihai, L. Hongquan, X. Renshou, Z. Xinwei, “Anomalous effects in 
deuterium/metal systems,” paper 24-PII-6. 
L. Heqing, S. Sihai, L. Hongquan, X. Renshou, Z. Xinwei, “Anomalous effects in 
deuterium/metal systems,” preprint of the ICCF3 proceedings. 
N. Wada and K. Nishizawa, “Nuclear fusion in solid,” Jap. J. Appl. Phys. 28 L2017 
E. Yamaguchi and T. Nishioka, “Direct evidences of nuclear fusion reactions in 
deuterated palladium,” paper 24-PI-3. 
E. Yamaguchi and T. Nishioka, “Direct evidences of nuclear fusion reactions in 
deuterated palladium,” preprint of the ICCF3 proceedings. 
M. H. Miles and B. F. Bush, “Search for anomalous effects involving excess power, 
helium, and tritium during D2O electrolysis using palladium cathodes,” paper 24-PI-4. 
J. O'M. Bockris, C. Chien, and Z. Minevski, “Tritium and helium production in 
palladium electrodes and the fugacity of deuterium therein,” paper 24-PI-11 
See also: C. Chien, D. Hodko, Z. Minevski and J. O'M. Bockris, “On an electrode 
producing massive quantities of tritium and helium,” J. of Electroanalytical Chemistry, 
Vol 338, p. 189 (1992) 
S. Isagawa, Y. Kanda and T. Suzuki, “Search for excess heat, neutron emission and 
tritium yield from electrochemically charged palladium in D2O,” paper 24-PII-31. 
S. Isagawa, Y. Kanda and T. Suzuki, “Search for excess heat, neutron emission and 
tritium yield from electrochemically charged palladium in D2O,” preprint of the ICCF3 
proceedings. 
C. M. Wan, C. J. Linn, C. Y. Liang, S. K. Chen, C. C. Wan and T. P. Perng, “Repeated 
heat bursts in the electrolysis of D2O,” paper 24-PII-18. 
C. M. Wan, S. K. Chen, L. J. Yuan, C. C. Wan and C. Y. Liang, “Simultaneous and 
reproducible detection of neutrons and excess heat in cold fusion experiments,” preprint, 
Sept. 1992, from the materials Science Center, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, 
Taiwan. 
L. J. Yuan, C. M. Wan, C. Y. Liang, and S. K. Chen, “Neutron monitoring on cold fusion 
experiments,” paper 24-PI-34. 
A. Takahashi, A. Mega, T. Takeuchi, H. Miyamaru, and T. Iida, “Anomalous excess heat 
by D2O/Pd cell under L-H mode electrolysis,” paper 24-PII-12. 
A. Takahashi, A. Mega, T. Takeuchi, H. Miyamaru, and T. Iida, “Anomalous excess heat 
by D2O/Pd cell under L-H mode electrolysis,” preprint of the ICCF3 proceedings. 
E. Mallove, presented during the Panel discussion on the Takahashi method. 
E. Storms, “Measurements of excess heat from a Pons-Fleischmann type electrolytic cell 
using palladium sheet,” paper 22-PII-26. This paper was presented by T. Claytor, as 
Storms was unable to attend. 
F. Celani, A. Spallone, P. Tripodi and A. Nuvoli, “Measurements of excess heat and 
tritium during self-biased pulsed electrolysis of Pd-D2O,” paper 24-PII-13. 
F. Celani, A. Spallone, P. Tripodi and A. Nuvoli, “Measurements of excess heat and 
tritium during self-biased pulsed electrolysis of Pd-D2O,” preprint of the ICCF3 
proceedings. 
N. Oyama, T. Terashima, S. Kasahara, O. Hatozaki, T. Ohsaka and T. Tatsuma, 
“Electrochemical calorimetry of D2O electrolysis using a palladium cathode in a clodes 
cell system,” paper 22-pII-29. 
T. N. Claytor, D. G. Tuggle and H. O. Menlove, “Evolution of tritium from palladium in 
the solid state gas cell,” paper 24-PI-10. 
V. A. Romodanov, V. I. Savin, and Yu. M. Timofeev, “Reactions of nuclear fusion in 
condensed media,” paper 22-PI-2. 
V. A. Romodanov, V. I. Savin, and Yu. M. Timofeev, “Nuclear fusion in condensed 
matter,” preprint UDC: 539.172.13. 
R. Notoya and M. Enyo, “Excess heat production in Electrolysis in K2CO3 solution with 
Ni electrodes,”paper 24-PII-35. 
R. L. Mills and S. P. Kneizys, “Excess heat production by the electrolysis of an aqueous 
potassium carbonate electrolyte and the implications for cold fusion,” Fusion Tech. 20 
65, (1991). 
V. Noninski, “Excess heat during the electrolysis of a light water solution of K2CO3 with 
a nickel cathode,” Fusion Tech. 21 163, (1992). 
M. Srinivasan, A. Shyam, T. K. Shankarnarayanan, M. B. Bajpai, H. Ramamurthy, U. K. 
Mukherjee, M. S. Krishnan, M. G. Nayar, and Y. Naik, “Tritium and excess heat 
generation during electrolysis of aqueous solutions of alkali salts with nickel cathode,” 
paper 22-PII-28. 
M. Srinivasan, A. Shyam, T. K. Shankarnarayanan, M. B. Bajpai, H. Ramamurthy, U. K. 
Mukherjee, M. S. Krishnan, M. G. Nayar, and Y. Naik, “Tritium and excess heat 
generation during electrolysis of aqueous solutions of alkali salts with nickel cathode,” 
preprint of the ICCF3 proceedings. 
R. T. Bush and R. D. Eagleton, “Calorimetric studies of an electrolytic excess heat effect 
employing light water-based electrolytes of some alkali salts,” paper 24-PII-32. 
T. Ohmori and M. Enyo, “Excess heat produced during the electrolysis on Ni, Au, Ag 
and Sn electrodes in alkaline media,” paper 24-PII-36. 
S. Pons and M. Fleischmann, Il Nuovo Cimento, 105A 763 (1992). 
D. R. Coupland, M. L. Doyle, J. W. Jenkins, J. H. F. Notton, R. J. Potter and D. T. 
Thompson, “Some observations related to the presence of hydrogen and deuterium in 
palladium,” paper 22-PII-2. 
D. R. Coupland, M. L. Doyle, J. W. Jenkins, J. H. F. Notton, R. J. Potter and D. T. 
Thompson, “Some observations related to the presence of hydrogen and deuterium in 
palladium,” preprint of the ICCF3 proceedings. 
D. Gozzi, P.L. Cignini, R. Caputo, M. Tomellini, E. Cisbani, S. Frullani, F. Garabaldi, M. 
Jodice, and G. M. Urcioli, “Experiment with global detection of the cold fusion 
products,” paper 24-PI-7. 
M. Nakada, T. Kusunoki, Y. Fujii, M. Okamoto and O. Odawara, “A role for lithium for 
the neutron emission in heavy water electrolysis,” paper 22-PII-15. 
S. Miyamoto, K. Sueki, H. Iwai, M. Fujii, T. Shirakawa, H. Miura, T. Watanabe, H. 
Toriumi, T. Uehara, Y. Nakamitsu, M. Chiba, T. Hirose, and H. Nakahara, “Measure of 
protons and observations of the change of electrolysis parameters in the galvanostatic  
electrolysis of the 0.1M-LiOD/D2O solution,” paper 24-PI-37. 
S. Miyamoto, K. Sueki, H. Iwai, M. Fujii, T. Shirakawa, H. Miura, T. Watanabe, H. 
Toriumi, T. Uehara, Y. Nakamitsu, M. Chiba, T. Hirose, and H. Nakahara, “Measure of 
protons and observations of the change of electrolysis parameters in the galvanostatic 
electrolysis of the 0.1M-LiOD/D2O solution,” preprint of the ICCF3 proceedings. 
M. Corradi, F. Ferrarotto, M. Giannini, V. Milone, B. Stella, L. Storelli, F. Celani, and A. 
Spallone, “Evidence for stimulated emission of neutrons from deuterated palladium,” 
paper 24-PI-17. 
Y. Fukai, “The ABC's of the hydrogen-metal system,” paper 22-PII-3. 
Y. Fukai, “The ABC's of the hydrogen-metal system,” preprint of the ICCF3 
proceedings. 
K. Watanabe, Y. Fukai, N. Niimura and O. Konno, “A search for fracture-induced 
nuclear fusion in some deuterium-loaded materials,” 24-PII-8. 
E. Choi, E. Eriji, and H. Ohsumi, “Limit on fast neutrons from dd fusion in deuterized Pd 
by means of Ge detectors,” paper 24-PI-30. 
S. Miyamoto, K. Sueki, H. Iwai, M. Fujii, T. Shirakawa, H. Miura, T. Watanabe, H. 
Toriumi, T. Uehara, Y. Nakamitsu, M. Chiba, T. Hirose, and H. Nakahara, 
“Measurement of protons and observation of the change of electrolysis parameters in the 
galvanostatic electrolysis of the 0.1M-LiOD/D2O solution,” paper 24-PI-37. 
D. Morrison, “Review of cold fusion experiments,” paper 24-PI-9. 
D. R. O. Morrison, “The third international cold fusion conference,” Cold Fusion Update 
7 on the computer network, Nov. 1 - Dec. 6, 1992. 
J. Huizenga, “Cold fusion claims,” post deadline paper. 
G. Preparata, “Theory of cold fusion in deuterated palladium,” paper 22-PI-1. 
S. Chubb and T. Chubb, “Ion band state fusion,” paper 22-PI-20. 
S. Chubb and T. Chubb, “Ion band state fusion,”  preprint of the ICCF3 proceedings. 
T. Matsumoto, “Review for Nattoh model and experimental findings during cold fusion,” 
paper 22-PI-8. 
A. Takahasi, “Nuclear products by D2O/Pd electrolysis and multibody fusion,” Proc. Int. 
Symp. Nonlinear Phenomena in Electromagnetic Fields, Nagoya (1992). 
K. Tsuchiya, K. Ohashi and M. Fukuchi, “Mechanism of cold nuclear fusion in 
palladium,” paper 22-PI-13. 
N. Matsunami, “A mechanism for cold nuclear fusion: barrier reduction by screening 
under transient coherent flow of deuterium,” paper 22-PI-15. 
Q. Q. Gou, Z. H. Zhu, and Q. F. Zhang, “The possible theoretical model and it's 
experimental evidences of cold fusion,” paper 22-PI-32. 
V. I. Vysotskii, “Nonthreshold cold fusion as a result of nonequilibrium deuterium 
Fermi-condensate in microholes of crystal,” paper 22-PI-28. 
K. Yasui, “Fractofusion Mechanism,” paper 22-PI-30. 
N. Yabuuchi, “Quantum mechanics on cold fusion,” paper 22-PI-26. 
G. V. Fedorovich, “Nuclear fusion in the E-cell,” paper 22-PI-29. 
A. Tenenbaum and E. Tabet, “Temporal sequence of nuclear signals in a dry cold fusion 
experiment,” paper 22-PI-23. 
K. Fukushima, “A new mechanism for cold fusion – sono-fusion,” paper 22-PI-16. 
Y. E. Kim, M. Rabinowitz, R. A. Rice and J. H. Yoon, “Condensed matter effects for 
cold and hot fusion,” paper 22-PI-25. 
Y. E. Kim, M. Rabinowitz, R. A. Rice and J. H. Yoon, “High density fusion and the solar 
neutrino problem,” paper 22-PI-31. 
Y. E. Kim, M. Rabinowitz, R. A. Rice and J. H. Yoon, “Condensed matter effects for 
cold and hot fusion,”  preprint of the ICCF3 proceedings. 
X. Li, D. Jin, L. Chang, X. Zhang and W. Zhang, “Combined resonance tunneling in low 
energy D-D nuclear reaction,” paper 22-PI-17. 
L. Fonda and G. L. Shaw, “Anti-diquark catalysis of cold fusion,” paper 22-PI-18. 
V. A. Chechin and V. A. Tsarev, “On non-stationary quantum mechanical origin of cold 
nuclear fusion,” paper 22-PI-7. 
V. A. Tsarev and D. H. Worledge, “Cold fusion studies in the USSR,” Fusion Tech. 22, 
138 (1992). 
J. Yang, “Abnormal Nuclear Phenomena and Weak Interaction Processes,” paper 22-PI-
J. Yang, “Dineutron model of the cold fusion,” paper 22-PI-10. 
T. Tani and Y. Kobayashi, “Tunnel disintegration and neutron emission probability,” 
paper 22-PI-5. 
P. L. Hagelstein, “Coherent and semi-coherent neutron reactions,” paper 22-PI-4. 
P. L. Hagelstein, “Coherence effects: theoretical considerations,” paper 22-PI-3. 
P. L. Hagelstein, “Coherent and semi-coherent neutron reactions,” preprint of the ICCF3 
proceedings. 
S. Jones, “Update on BYU research,” paper 24-PI-1. 
