1. Introduction

A demonstration of our excess heat experiment was performed in Salt Lake City (SLC) at an American
Chemical Society conference on March 23, 2009, the 20th anniversary of the announcement by
Fleischmann and Pons that they had achieved nuclear fusion in a bottle. The apparatus for this
demonstration was shipped from our Portland State University (PSU) laboratory. The electrolyte,
containing sulfuric acid, a hazardous chemical, was to be shipped separately, with required precautions.
However, the electrolyte did not arrive in SLC in time for the demonstration. Rather than cancelling the
demonstration, commercial battery fluid was substituted for our electrolyte.


2. Experimental methods and Results

The battery fluid contained dilute sulfuric acid (Sp.G. !.265).This was further diluted with tap water.
Therefore, the diluted electrolyte contained no heavy water. This was the electrolyte for the control cell
(C cell). This cell contained a Pt foil anode, a Pd foil cathode, and hydrogen and sulfate ions in the
electrolyte. The experimental cell (E cell) was identical except that it contained the same commercial
battery fluid diluted with heavy water instead of tap water. This cell also contained a Pt foil anode and a
Pd foil cathode, but the electrolyte contained both hydrogen ions and deuterium ions, in addition to
sulfate ions. The cell components are given in Table 1.

The two cells were connected in series to a direct current power supply which supplied constant current to
both cells at almost the same voltage. Thus, the power input was almost identical for the two cells (about
14 watts), but the power output was at least one watt higher for the C cell compared with the E cell. This
result was totally unexpected. . The experiment in SLC was repeated, and the result was the same, i.e. the
C cell produced more than one watt greater thermal power than the E cell.

Our previous experiments used deionized water and pure sulfuric acid (Sp.G. 1.84) for the C cell
electrolyte, and pure heavy water and the same sulfuric acid for the E cell electrolyte. A typical excess
heat result was about 0.8 watt higher power output from the E cell. This was the result which we
demonstrated at ICCF10 in Cambridge, MA in 2003.

After electrolysis for about two hours, the demonstration was stopped, the electrolyte was removed, and
the apparatus was shipped back to PSU. The C cell cathode was removed from the cell and examined.
Whereas it originally was a flat, silvery foil, it is now black and bent lengthwise to a curved surface which
was concave to the anode during electrolysis. It was then examined with a scanning electron microscope
(SEM) equipped with an energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS). Fig. 1 shows the pitted topography on
the concave side of a Pd cathode after electrolysis for about two hours in light water electrolyte. A
characteristic x-ray spectrum was taken by scanning the electron beam over the entire area of Fig. 1. The
only elements detected in this spectrum were C, O, Al, Pd, and Pt. The origin of C is not known, O, Al,
and Pt are thought to result from the Pt-Al2O3 recombination catalyst suspended above the electrolyte. Pt
could also be produced by electroplating Pt dissolved from the anode. 

Table 1. Cell components for experiment on 3-23-09 in SLC. 

In Fig. 1 the gray areas contain mostly Pd, the white areas contain mostly electroplated Pt , and the black
holes contain mostly Pd with statistically significant Ag. The ratio Ag/Pd averages 0.06 for 9 black holes.
This Pd/Ag ratio for each of these nine black holes is given in Table 2.

The area shown in Fig. 1 was chosen for intensive study because it is highly pitted. One possible
explanation for the pitting is that localized melting and vaporization occurred. Such events seem unlikely
with only 14 watts input energy. Another possibility is that chemical dissolution occurred. If so, a more
uniform topography would be expected instead of the pitted surface shown in Fig. 1. In previous research
localized concentrations of anomalous elements were found on surface asperities [1] and in pits [2] The
SEM electron beam, less than 1µm diameter, was focused on the asperity or pit. This resulted in the
emission of characteristic x-rays from all of the elements present. The x-rays were detected and processed
to produce a spectrum from each pit. Carbon, atomic number 6, and all elements of higher atomic
numbers, could be detected and quantified by this method.

Table 2. Silver content at various locations in the black pits shown in Fig. 1. Statistically significant (>3 sigma)
amounts of Ag were found in nine of 14 pits which were analyzed. The spectrum obtained by scanning the electron
beam over the whole area of Fig. 1 (wa) did not contain Ag.

Fig. 1 - Micrograph of the concave side of the Pd cathode after about two hours electrolysis in light water electrolyte. 

Fig. 2 - Topography of a hotspot on the convex side of a Pd cathode after electrolysis for about two hours in light 
water electrolyte, SLC 3-23-09. Twelve of 14 black holes contained statistically significant Ag (>3 sigma). The 
average ratio Ag/Pd was 0.09, and the range was 0.06 to 0.14. 


3. Discussion 

We now examine the possibility that the silver detected in the black holes originated from environmental 
contamination, such as impurities from the tap water. This seems unlikely because deposition occurs 
preferentially on asperities, not in pits. The black holes in figures 1 and 2 are rimmed with white particles 
which are almost pure platinum. We suggest that miniature explosions occurred, leaving behind pits 
containing Ag, which resulted from thermal neutrons absorbed by Pd. The unstable Pd isotopes then beta 
decayed to form Ag and heat sufficient to form a localized pit. Pt then electroplated from the electrolyte 
onto the rims, which were elevated above the original surface.  

EDS measurements were also performed on the cathode from the E cell. Topography was similar to  that 
found on the C cell cathode, and anomalous Ag was found in the pits. Our efforts were concentrated on 
the light water C cell cathode because it produced more heat than the heavy water E cell. 

We are currently using secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) before and after electrolysis to 
determine if there are changes in Pd isotopic abundance in our cathodes. 


4. Conclusions 

Excess heat was obtained from electrolysis with palladium cathodes in  cells containing acidified H2O 
electrolyte compared with cells containing palladium cathodes and acidified D2O electrolyte. 

Statistically significant, localized concentrations of silver were found in pits on the surfaces of palladium 
cathodes after electrolysis. 

The results for the light water cells were obtained using commercial battery acid diluted with tap water, 
suggesting that highly purified chemicals are not necessary for LENR. 


5. References 

[1]. J. Dash, G. Noble, and D. Diman, Trans. Fusion Tech. 26, 299(1994). 
[2]. J. Warner and J. Dash, Conf. Proc. 70, ICCF8, F. Scaramuzzi (Ed), SIF,Bologna, 2000, p.161. 
