1. Introduction

LENR presents major opportunities to enhance the public interest as a potential new source of cheap and clean energy.
Its improved prospects in recent years have resulted in a need for updates in LENR policies. Policymaking opportuni-
ties are emerging in three main areas – supporting LENR to realize its potential beneﬁts, planning proactively to deal
with its anticipated adverse secondary impacts, and integrating the updates in a comprehensive policy program. The
objectives of this paper are to:
– Review the changing landscape of LENR.
– Describe opportunities for updating policies for support of LENR development.
– Delineate potential policies for mitigating adverse secondary impacts.
– Analyze opportunities for integrating LENR policies both nationally and internationally.
– Summarize the beneﬁts and challenges of achieving updated and integrated policies.

The case of cold fusion would perhaps be a curiosity in the history of science was the world not in such desperate need
of new sources of clean and inexpensive energy.


2. The Changing Landscape of LENR

Improved LENR prospects are indicated by at least four lines of argument – the signiﬁcant numbers and varied loca-
tions of researchers in several countries, the resulting large body of accumulated evidence, advances in theory devel-
opment, and recent favorable events.

2.1. Continued research worldwide:
Unlike most claims of new phenomena that are not accepted by mainstream science, LENR research was not discon-
tinued after it was rejected. On the contrary, many investigators have continued to work in the ﬁeld, resulting in a
large body of evidence for LENR reality. For example, at least 50 investigators in nine countries (including the US,
Italy, Japan, India, and China) have continued LENR research. An international LENR society, International Society
of Condensed Matter Nuclear Science (ISCMNS), was formed a few years ago, and an afﬁliated journal dedicated to
LENR research reporting (J. Condensed Matter Nucl. Sci.) is published quarterly. International conferences are held
in countries around the world every 1–2 years, with a typical attendance of about 200. Nineteen conferences have been
held since they were begun in 1990. Attendance at the latest conference in 2015, which took place in Italy, was nearly
600 [1]. A substantial community of LENR researchers and other interested parties has emerged. Its size is indicated
by the CMNS Google Group, which was formed about 10 years ago and currently has over 300 participants.

Although the US Department of Energy has not provided leadership in LENR research, investigations continued
at several other US agencies after the 1989 rejection. For example, the US National Aeronautics and Space Admin-
istration (NASA) has conducted research at both the Glenn and Langley research centers [2,3]. Elements of the US
Department of Defense (DoD) have also continued research and related interests. Several components of the US Navy
have also had active LENR research efforts. The US Naval Research Laboratory (NRL), for example, has been work-
ing on LENR since the ﬁeld started in 1989. Other Navy organizations that have pursued LENR research and related
activities are the US Space and Naval Warfare Systems Command (SPAWAR), US Naval Air Weapons Station (China
Lake), and the US Naval Postgraduate School.

2.2. Large and growing body of evidence:
The substantial research in LENR has resulted in a large accumulation of evidence for its reality. One indicator of
this evidence is a website dedicated to collecting LENR publications (LENR-CANR.org), which has a bibliography
T.W. Grimshaw / Journal of Condensed Matter Nuclear Science 19 (2016) 88–97
of more than 3500 journal papers and related items. As of January 2015, an estimated 3.2 million papers had been
downloaded from the website [4].

Storms [5] has documented 380 papers reporting LENR just up to about 2007 as indicated by four signatures
– anomalous heat (184 reports), tritium (61), transmutation (80), and radiation (55). Many more reports have been
prepared in the subsequent years. Storms and Grimshaw [6] examined the evidence for LENR in relation to published
criteria for distinguishing science from pseudoscience by Langmuir [7], Sagan [8], and Shermer [9]. Twenty-seven
criteria were compiled, and LENR was examined in relation to each criterion. It was found that the criteria were
satisﬁed, and it was concluded that LENR research is science and not pseudoscience.

2.3. Advances in theory development:
Progress has also been made in developing an explanation of LENR. Many hypotheses have been advanced, but much
remains to be done to converge on a full explanation. Two well-known examples are the hypotheses advanced by Peter
Hagelstein of MIT and Edmund Storms, who is retired from Los Alamos National Laboratory.

Hagelstein [10] notes that LENR is indicated by the large amount of energy produced, the absence of expected
chemical products, and the presence of expected amounts of new helium-4 in palladium deuteride experiments where
LENR is observed. He observes that there appears to be no other conclusion besides a nuclear origin for the observa-
tions, but that there is a lack in LENR of the usual radiation signals that are used to study nuclear reactions. Hagelstein’s
hypothesis includes both conventional and new physics. In palladium deuteride systems reactions occur in vacancies
in the lattice. The reactions involve fractionation of a large nuclear quantum combined with a coupling mechanism
involving vibration and nuclei. Hagelstein utilizes the fundamental relativistic Hamiltonian in the explanation. The
approach thus uses new concepts on a foundation of established physics.

Storms’ hypothesis [11] proposes small sites, termed “nuclear active environments” (NAEs), that are located at or
close to the surface rather than in the lattice, as is postulated by Hagelstein. These NAEs form in microcracks that
are typically caused by stress relief in the material. Hydrogen ions migrate into the NAEs and form linear structures
called “hydrotons”. Vibration of the ions in the hydroton results in nuclear reactions, with release of energy as photons
that are absorbed in the lattice. The mechanism of the nuclear reactions in the hydroton has not yet been explained but
would almost certainly involve new physics.

2.4. Recent developments:
The case for LENR is strengthened by several recent occurrences in the ﬁeld. One of the most signiﬁcant of these
was the emergence of research centers at several universities. The Sidney Kimmel Institute for Nuclear Renaissance
(SKINR) was formed at the University of Missouri in 2012 to perform fundamental research aimed at discovery of the
mechanisms of the anomalous heat effect, a term used for LENR. Experiments are performed in four areas – nuclear
mechanism, general mechanism, solid state theory, and cathode development (for electrolytic cells) [12]. The Center
for Emerging Energy Science (CEES) was founded at Texas Tech. University in 2015 to explore critical parameters in
the observation of the anomalous heat effect [13]. The intent of its work is to gain fundamental understanding of the
LENR mechanisms. A Condensed Matter Nuclear Reactions Division was also recently formed at Tohoku University
in Sendai, Japan. Three purposes have been advanced for the Division – fundamental LENR research, development of
a new energy generation method, and determination of a new approach for nuclear waste decontamination [14].

Further indication that cold fusion potential may be realized is the signiﬁcant number of LENR-based devices that
have been introduced in recent years. Although many of the claims have not been veriﬁed (and signiﬁcant issues have
been identiﬁed in some cases), the devices represent a high level of interest and activity that may signify a need for
policy updates. One major example is Andrea Rossi’s E-Cat (for “energy catalyzer”), which is apparently based on a
T.W. Grimshaw / Journal of Condensed Matter Nuclear Science 19 (2016) 88–97
nickel–hydrogen setup. Several demonstrations of this device were held in 2011, culminating in a multiple-unit test
in October 2011. About 2350 kWh of energy was reported for this test [15]. A three-part test of a high-temperature
version of Rossi’s device (E-Cat HT or “Hot Cat”) was subsequently performed [16]. The ﬁrst part of the test was not
considered successful because the reactor melted before meaningful data could be obtained. The second test reportedly
produced 195 kWh of energy. The third part was indicated to produce 95 kWh.

Another set of experiments, consisting of two phases, was subsequently performed with a different E-Cat design
[17]. These experiments are frequently referred to as the “Lugano test” for the location in Switzerland where they were
performed. During the 32-day test, 1.4 MWh of net energy was reported. The experiments also included analyses of
the isotopes of in the energy-producing contents of the E-Cat. Observed shifts in the isotope composition before and
after the tests were inferred to be the result of nuclear reactions. The large amounts of energy produced, high ratios
of output to input power, and changes in isotope content were interpreted as evidence of LENR. It was announced in
2014 that the ﬁrm Industrial Heat had acquired partial rights to Rossi’s E-Cat technology [18].

Investigation of devices apparently similar in design to the E-Cat has continued, notably in Russia and China.
Parkhomov [19,20], a retired researcher from Lomonosov Moscow State University, reported experiments performed
with two different but related designs. Both devices were conﬁgured to approximate the Lugano test of Rossi’s E-
Cat, but with signiﬁcant differences, including the method of heat measurement. A principal conclusion was that
the devices, described as “similar to (the) high-temperature Rossi heat generator ... produce more energy than they
consume” above temperatures above about 1100◦C. It was also concluded that the second device produced more than
40 kWh of excess energy.

Jiang is a retired researcher afﬁliated with the Ni–H Research Group at the China Institute of Atomic Energy in
Beijing. His reactor design and materials are somewhat similar to those of Parkhomov with a setup approximating the
Lugano test [21]. The experiment was apparently performed for over 12 h, during which 600 W of excess heat was
observed for a portion of that time. The reported ratio of the 600 W to the input power of 780 W was 0.77. Jiang
concluded that “the origin of excess heat cannot be explained by chemical energy”.

JET Energy, Inc. has conducted LENR research with two types of devices called the NANOR and PHUSOR [22],
both of which utilize deuterium. The PHUSOR is an aqueous conﬁguration that uses palladium or nickel with the
deuterium. The NANOR is non-aqueous and uses nano-scale particles consisting mainly of palladium, zirconium, and
nickel [23]. JET Energy maintains close collaboration with the Energy Production and Conversion Group at MIT [24].

Brillouin Energy [25] has developed LENR-based technology for energy production using hydrogen and nickel
(or other metal with appropriate properties). The technology is referred to as “Controlled Electron Capture Reaction”
(CECR). Hydrogen is brought into contact with nickel, and reactions are stimulated with electromagnetic pulses. The
energy is reported to be in the form of heat that is absorbed by the metal and captured for beneﬁcial use. An apparently
updated version of the Brillouin approach and technology (HHTT M) was recently reported [26].

None of these examples is yet a working device having practical applications or commercial production. However,
particularly when considered in aggregate, they provide further evidence that cold fusion may yet fulﬁll its potential as
a source of energy.

In summary, a changing landscape for LENR is indicated by the substantial number of researchers, the accumulated
body of research, and progress in developing theories. The recent emergence of academic research entities and the
proposed LENR energy devices also seem to strengthen the cold fusion case. Three goals must be achieved for LENR
and its beneﬁts to be realized - more consistent reproducibility, fuller explanation of the process, and demonstration of
its ability to produce usable amounts of energy. These goals may be achieved with afﬁrmative policies for increased
R&D support.

3. Policy Updates for LENR Support

The ﬁrst policymaking opportunity resulting from LENR’s changing landscape is revision of current policies for LENR
support. Updates in these policies may best be accomplished in a framework of evidence-based policymaking [27,28].
The policy options are:
(1) Discontinue research entirely (unlikely given the continuing interest).
(2) Business as usual – continued marginalization.
(3) Reinstatement and development with other emerging energy technologies.
(4) Enhanced support, perhaps on a par with hot fusion.
(5) Crash program, possibly like the Manhattan Project during World War II, to realize LENR’s beneﬁts.

Selecting the alternative that best serves the public interest may be challenging because of the history and continuing
rejection of LENR. Policymaking is further complicated by a need for improved reproducibility and a better explana-
tion of the LENR phenomenon. To deal with these complications, LENR policy may be analyzed and established in
terms of level of evidence for its existence:
(1) Preponderance of evidence (>50% probability).
(2) Clear and convincing evidence (>70%).
(3) Beyond a reasonable doubt (>90%).

The level of evidence may then be further interpreted for decisions on appropriate policy responses. At least a prepon-
derance of evidence may reasonably be inferred from the large number researchers, the major body of evidence that
has been accumulated, and the progress in achieving LENR explanation. Clear and convincing evidence is indicated by
the emergence of LENR-dedicated research centers at several universities and by the signiﬁcant number of proposed
devices that purport to produce energy from LENR. When an adequate explanation is achieved (or reliable empirical
devices emerge), it may be asserted that the evidence is sufﬁcient to demonstrate LENR beyond a reasonable doubt.

Policy responses (PR) to these proposed levels of evidence may also be suggested. If LENR is indicated with a
preponderance of evidence, it should be fully reinstated and pursued with other emerging energy technologies. If there
is clear and convincing evidence, a higher level of support is needed, perhaps comparable to hot fusion support over the
past ﬁve decades. If LENR is indicated beyond a reasonable doubt, it may be appropriate to institute a crash program
similar to the Manhattan Project, which resulted in the atomic bomb in World War II.

In summary, it appears based on the level of evidence that LENR should at a minimum be reinstated and researched
fully. It may in fact warrant investigation and development at a level similar to hot fusion research. Figure 1 shows
diagrammatically how the changing landscape of LENR leads to the need for policy updates for its support. The
changing landscape began sometime after LENR’s 1989 announcement and rejection (AR). The four lines of argument
(4L) for its improved prospects led to a need for policy updates (NPU). The updates are founded on evidence-based
policymaking (EBP). The ﬁve policy options (PO) are evaluated by the level of evidence (LOE) for LENR existence,
leading to the appropriate policy responses (PR) – reinstate and research fully or provide more enhanced support.


4. Policies for Mitigating Adverse Secondary Impacts

The second policymaking opportunity resulting from LENR’s changing landscape is to address potential adverse sec-
ondary impacts (ASI) with proactive planning. Broad deployment of LENR for energy supply may be expected to have
major secondary impacts as a disruptive technology. Direct impacts are anticipated for all phases of the energy chain
– supply, transport, storage, and consumption. Indirect impacts will be felt most by the components of society that are
closely tied to the energy cycle, such as the affected sectors of the workforce and the communities that rely on energy
activities (e.g., coal mining towns).

Figure 1. The Changing Landscape of LENR and Resulting Need for Policy Updates for Its Support. AR – Announcement and Rejection (1989);
4L – Four Lines of Argument; NPU – Need for Policy Updates; EBP – Evidence-Based Policymaking Framework; PO – Five Policy Options; LOE
– Level of Evidence for LENR; PR – Policy Responses (Updates).

Technology Assessment (TA) is a mature and well-established method for addressing both direct and indirect
secondary impacts and may readily be applied to cold fusion case [29,30]. The stages of a TA application are generally
as follows:
(1) Identify impacts.
(2) Determined affected parties.
(3) Develop mitigation strategy.
(4) Deﬁne sources of assistance (e.g., agencies).
(5) Engage representatives (e.g., advisory group).
(6) Deﬁne mitigation measures (MM) for both direct and indirect impacts.
(7) Develop and implement mitigation plan (MP).

TA enables proactive planning to mitigate impacts and has ample precedent for application to energy-related issues
[31,32]. Figure 2 summarizes how the changing LENR landscape leads to the need for policies for mitigating adverse
secondary impacts in addition to required policy updates for supporting LENR development. Adverse secondary
impacts (ASI) are addressed by technology assessment methodology (TA). Mitigating measures (MM) are deﬁned,
leading to an overall mitigation plan (MP).

Figure 2. Illustration of Need for Policies to Mitigate Adverse Secondary Impacts Resulting from the Changing LENR Landscape. ASI – Adverse
Secondary Impacts; TA – Technology Assessment Methodology; MM – Mitigating Measures; MP – Overall Mitigation Plan.


5. Opportunities for Integrating LENR Policies

A third policymaking opportunity for LENR is to integrate the policy actions and updates. For example, policies for
mitigation planning for secondary impacts can be coordinated with the pace of LENR development and deployment.
Policies can also be integrated among agencies at the national level, between the public and private sectors, and among
nations.

5.1. Integration of mitigation planning with LENR development support:
As LENR prospects improve as a result of increased support, mitigation planning can be adjusted for the changing
imminence and rate of deployment. This adjustment would be necessary to achieve the objectives of proactive planning
for mitigation. Figure 3 shows how the policy response for LENR development (PR) and resulting rate of deployment
guides planning for mitigation (GP) as the overall plan (MP) is prepared.

5.2. Integration of LENR policies among agencies, nations, and the private sector:
A focus on integrated LENR policymaking results in opportunities in several other policy areas. Public agency policy
integration (PA) may take place at the local, state, and national levels and requires alignment and effective communi-
cation of the policymaking entities within the agencies. Formal arrangements, such as inter-agency agreements, may
be used, or integration may be achieved by informal measures, such as regular inter-agency meetings. While these
measures have been used to some extent by agencies for various issues in the past, they may become increasingly
important as LENR deployment progresses.

LENR development – and dealing with its impacts – may be enhanced with stronger integration between the public
and private components of society (PP). For example, LENR may beneﬁt from government policies and measures to
address “market failures”, in a similar vein to current laws and regulations for environmental protection. Existing
programs, such as small-business research support and provisions for technology transfer from government labs to
privately held companies, could increase in importance if the government becomes more active in LENR research.
Public-private partnerships (PPPs) may provide another vehicle for supporting LENR development and realization.
An improved stance among patent and trademark entities would also substantially enhance efforts in the private sector
to realize the beneﬁts of LENR. Opportunities may be found for integrating these policy changes and updates in the
public and private aspects of LENR development.

Figure 3.
The Pace of Mitigation Planning is Guided by Policies for LENR Development and the Resulting Rate of Its Deployment. GP –
Guidance for Mitigation Planning.

At the international level, programs may be established for supporting LENR research (IN). As LENR reaches
the stage of worldwide deployment, bilateral and multi-lateral agreements may be made or updated to enhance its
availability. For example, the United Nations may implement programs for making small LENR units available in a
dispersed manner in Third World nations. World Bank loans may be made to nations needing support in acquiring
LENR technology for the beneﬁt of human health and the environment. The World Trade Organization may consider
LENR and its humanitarian beneﬁts for special rulemaking to enhance availability worldwide. Again, opportunities
may be found for integration of policy changes or updates among these international entities.

5.3. Summary path to updated and integrated LENR policies:
As policies are updated for LENR support and for mitigating adverse secondary impacts, and as they are integrated
at various levels, the public interest will be served for the humanitarian beneﬁts of LENR. Figure 4 illustrates the
full path from the present situation of LENR’s changing landscape to the prospective future of fully updated and
integrated LENR policies. Integrated policymaking (IPM) is the foundation for public agency (PA), public-private
(PP), and international (IN) policy integration. The desired result is fully updated and integrated policies (UIP) for
LENR support and impact mitigation.


6. Beneﬁts and Challenges of LENR Policy Integration

Achieving integration of LENR policies as updates are accomplished will have substantial public interest beneﬁts. But
many challenges must be overcome as well. LENR policy integration will help avoid conﬂicts and actions that are at
cross-purposes among interested parties. Correspondingly, there will be increased
efﬁciency in achieving the policy objectives of the parties as well as increased cost effectiveness where entities
have common interests. Policy integration may also achieve improved social equity, with more rational decisions and
less inﬂuence of purely political considerations.

A principal challenge for policy update and integration is the historical barrier to LENR acceptance after its initial
rejection. This barrier seems likely to be surmounted as LENR continues to be investigated and the evidence continues
to show that it is real – and that its potential beneﬁts are attainable. Another challenge is the sheer immensity of
the expected direct and indirect secondary impacts. Proactive planning to address these impacts will be a major
undertaking. The existence of the long-standing and well-established energy policy framework may also present a
barrier to effective LENR policies and their integration. This framework includes many conﬂicting interests and
agendas that will have to be considered as policies are updated and integrated.

Figure 4.
Path to Updated and Integrated LENR Policies. IPM – Integrated Policymaking Framework; PA – Integration among Public Agencies;
PP – Policy Coordination between Public and Private Sectors; IN – Integration among Nations at the International Level; UIP – Updated and
Integrated LENR Policies.


7. Summary and Conclusions

Despite being rejected not long after it was announced, LENR has continued to be pursued in many venues, resulting
in improved prospects and the need for policy updates. Updates are needed both for support of LENR development
and preparation to mitigate its anticipated adverse secondary impacts. As these updates are accomplished, there are
opportunities to integrate the policies to support and realize LENR with mitigation planning for anticipated impacts.
There are also policy integration opportunities among public and private entities and at many levels within nations and
internationally. The beneﬁts of updating and integrating LENR policies are substantial, but the challenges for doing so
are also very large. Opportunities for policy updates and integration may be set forth conceptually, but realization in
the “real world” will be much more difﬁcult. Nevertheless, it is clear that the public interest will be served by updating
LENR policies and achieving their integration.


References
International Society of Condensed Matter Nuclear Science. Date unknown. Online. Available: http://www. iscmns.org/
S. Wrbanek et al., NASA Glenn Research Center Experience with “LENR Phenomenon”, Presentation at Interagency Ad-
vanced Power Group (IAPG), Mechanical Working Group (MWG). May 2012.
P. Douglas and D. Wells et al., Low Energy Nuclear Reaction Aircraft – 2013 ARMD Seedling Fund Phase I Project. Langley
Research Center, Hampton, Virginia. NASA/TM – 2014-218283, 2013.
LENR-CANR.org, a Library of Papers about Cold Fusion, Online, Available: http://lenr-canr.org/wordpress/ ?page_id=1213.
E. Storms, Science of low energy nuclear reaction: a comprehensive compilation of evidence and explanations about cold
fusion, World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, Tables 2, 6, 8, 11, 2007.
E. Storms and T. Grimshaw, Judging the validity of the Fleischmann–Pons effect, J. Condensed Matter Nucl. Sci. 3 (2010)
I. Langmiur, Colloquium on pathological science. held at the Knolls research laboratory, December 181953, Reproduced as
“Pathological Science”, Phys. Today 42(10) (1989) 36–48.
C. Sagan, The ﬁne art of baloney detection, Chapter 13 in The Demon-Haunted World: Science as a Candle in the Dark,
Random House, New York, NY, 1995.
M. Shermer, The Borderlands of Science – Where Sense Meets Nonsense, Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford, UK, 2001.
[10] P. Hagelstein and I. Chaudhary, Phonon models for anomalies in condensed matter nuclear science, Current Sci. 108(4)
(2015) 507–513.
[11] E. Storms, The Evaluation of Low Energy Nuclear Reaction: an Explanation of the Relationship between Observation and
Explanation, Inﬁnite Energy Press, Concord, NH, 2014.
[12] G. Hubler, Sidney Kimmel institute for nuclear renaissance, Current Sci. 108(4) ( 2015) 562–564.
[13] T. Scarbrough et al., The center to study the anomalous het effects, Poster Presented at ICCF-19, Padua, Italy, April. 2015.
[14] Y. Iwamura et al., The launch of a new plan on condensed matter nuclear science at Tohoku University, Paper Presented at
ICCF-19. Padua, Italy, April 2015.
[15] D. Hambling, Success for Andrea Rossi’s E-Cat cold fusion system, but mysteries remain, Wired, October 29, 2011.
[16] G. Levi et al., Indication of anomalous heat energy production in a reactor device containing hydrogen loaded nickel powder,
Cornell University Library arXiv, 2013.
[17] G. Levi et al., Observation of abundant heat production from a reactor device and of isotopic changes of fuel, Unpublished
manuscript, October 2014.
T.W. Grimshaw / Journal of Condensed Matter Nuclear Science 19 (2016) 88–97
[18] PRWire, PRNewswire, Industrial heat has acquired Andrea Rossi’s E-Cat technology, Research Triangle Park, January 24,
[19] A. Parkhomov and E. Belousova, Researches of the heat generator similar to high temperature Rossi reactor, Poster Presented
at ICCF-19. Padua, Italy, April 2015.
[20] M. McKubre, A Russian experiment: high temperature, nickel, natural hydrogen, Inﬁnite Energy, Issue 120, March/April.
9–11, 2015.
[21] Jiang, S., 2015. New Result of Anomalous Heat Production in Hydrogen-Nickel Metals at High Temperature. Presentation
Posted at E-Cat World. www.e-catworld. May 30.
[22] D. Nagel, Scientiﬁc and commercial overview of ICCF18, Inﬁnite Energy, Issue 112, November/December 2013.
[23] JET Energy Inc., undated. JET Energy NANOR c⃝-type LANR Technology. Online available:
http://world.std.com/∼mica/nanortechnology.htm.
[24] P. Hagelstein, On theory and science generally in connection with the Fleischmann–Pons experiment, Inﬁnite Energy, Issue
108, . March/April 2013, pp. 5–12.
[25] R. George et al., About Brillouin Corp, Online2014, a vailable:
http://brillouinenergy.com/ ?page=home_page.
[26] Brillouin Energy, HHTT M reactor and results, Poster at ICCf-19 Conference, Padua, Italy, April 2015.
[27] T. Grimshaw, Evidence-based public policy toward cold fusion: rational choices for a potential alternative energy source,
Austin, TX, Lyndon B. Johnson School of Public Afﬁars. Unpublished Professional Report, December 2008.
[28] T. Grimshaw, Evidence-based public policy for support of cold fusion (LENR) development, Poster Presented at 17th Int.
Conf. on Cold Fusion, Daejeon, South Korea, August 2012.
[29] T. Grimshaw, Public policy planning for broad deployment of cold fusion (LENR) for energy production, Paper FrM1-1, 17th
Int. Conf. on Cold Fusion, Daejeon, South Korea, August 2012.
[30] T. Grimshaw, Cold fusion public policy: rational – and urgent – need for change, Presentation at 2014 Cold Fusion/LANR
Colloquium at MIT, Cambridge, MA. March 2014.
[31] White, L. Irvin et al., Energy from the West: summary report, US environmental protection agency, Prepared by Science and
Public Policy Program, University of Oklahoma, Prepared for Ofﬁce of Research and Development, EPA (600/9-79-027),
August 1979.
[32] L. Johns et al., A technology assessment of coal slurry pipelines. ofﬁce of technology assessment, NTIS order #PB-278675,
March 1978.
