1. Introduction

Since 1989 the activity on cold.fusion is mostly oriented to understand the 
true nature of the observed phenomena: if they are due to artifacts and/or known 
chemical and physical effects or they belong to a category of new phenomena which 
open a very interesting window in the physics of the condensed matter. 

The continuous improvement done on our experimental set-up is a clear 
evidence that our activity follows this guideline. In this framework, we moved and 
are still moving to design an experiment in which as many as possible independent 
variables can be measured in situ and at the same time in a multicell F&P-like 
experiments. 

Aim of this contribution is to show our recent results obtained in an improved 
experimental set-up which has been modified expecially in the parts of neutron 
detection and treatment of electrolysis gases before sampling for 4He mass­
spectrometric dete1mination. 


2. Methods

We will limit to describe only the parts which were changed or added with 
respect to our previous expe1iments reported in literaturel-2_ 
The flow-chait characterizing each cell is repmted in figure 1 below. 

Figure 1. Flow-chart of one cell apparatus. 

Electrochemical Cells 
Heat excess is measured in a non-adiabatic calo,imeter-electrochemical cell 
through the compa,ison with the the,mal and electrochemical calibration curves 
obtained, using Au or Pt cathodes, in the same expe,imental conditions in which the 
expe,iment is then canied out. Cell geometry and can-ier gas bubble stining allow to 
take into consideration only the the1mal gradient on the plane orthogonal to the z-axis, 
so the calibration curve, obtained as a sequence of stationary states at constant input 
power values, Pin, is linear according to equation !ff= Pi0/k. LlT = Ts - 1:i and 1:i is 
the temperature of the thermostated water circulating in the torus-shaped bath. The 
heat excess is given by Pexc = Pout - Pin =l<LiT - Pin where LlT is now the value 
measured in the experiment. 

Features of such cells as calorimeters are: 
• Mate1ials- body: glass, cap: teflon
• Dimensions- inner 0 22 mm x 245 mm height
• Minimum heat detectable: 0.5 + 1 W
• Maximum Input Power: 50 W
• Time constant: "' 350 s
• Continuously fluxed under N2 (from LN2) at controlled flow-rate
Features as electrochemical cells are: 
• Electrolytic solution: 0.2 M LiOD(LiOH) in D20(H20)
• Anodes: Pt wire 01mm shaped as cylind1ical coil (IO mm inner 0 x 20 mm height)
• Cathodes: pure Pd centered in the z-axis of anode. Mostly shaped as 03mm rods
subjected to different the1mal and/or mechanical treatments according to the
procedures indicated below: 
A.Heated under lxl()-6 mbar at 1050 °C for 24 h and cooled at 0.5 °C/min
B.Screw dislocated by 3 rotations at room temperature
C.Screw dislocated by 3 rotations in LN2
D.Screw dislocated (0 .5 mm 0 wires) by 11 rotations at room temperature
E.As received
F.Edge dislocated under 104 kg for 15 h at room temperature
G.Edge dislocated under 104 kg for 30 min in LN2
Table I shows some characte1istics of the cathodes used in the expe1iment 
here rep01ted. Cells #1 and #8 were used as blanks; the first one had a Au cathode 
and in the second one the electolytic solution was LiOH in H20. Figure 2 shows, as 
typical, the calibration curves obtained both in thennal and electrochemical mode. As
already discussed, in p1inciple, both the calibration curves should be supe1imposed. 
Slight differences can be observed due to the different location in the cell of the heat 
sources (heater in the the1mal mode, electrodes in the electrochemical one). Each cell 
indicated in Table 1 was calibrated in both the modes and in all the cases straight 
lines, LlTi=(ajMaj)+(bjMbj)Pj11,were obtained. 
 
Table 1. Characte1istics of the cathodes 

Figure 2. Typical calibration curves obtained in thermal and electrochemical mode 

In Table 2, the averaged coeffients between the two modes were reported for 
each cell. 

Table 2. Coefficients of the calibration curve e uations 
 
In this section details are given for a procedure which is under development 
in order to detect 4He in electrolysis gases. Present data refer to synthetic mixtures 
modelling the expected ones. The Mass Spectrometer used is a Nuclide Analysis 
Associates HT 7 (60°.12" radius) equipped with an electron impact ionization 
source and a sixteen stages Cu/Be electron multiplier. The Knudsen cell molecular 
source has been removed and replaced with a flange canying an inlet system via a 
Balzers UDY 235 gas valve. The sample gas flows through the valve and a quarz 
tubing inserted into the ion source; the resulting flux is colinear to the ion path. The 
typical settings of the mass spectrometer main parameters are: 
- electron ionization energy
100 eV 
- electron emission cuffent
1.0 mA :
- ion accelerating potential
4510 V 
- electron multiplier gain (mass 28)
2.0x 105 

For a given mass spectrometer, sensitivity is mainly affected by, on one hand, 
the pa1tial pressure of 4He realized in the ionization chamber and, on the other hand, 
the resolving power needed in order to discriminate between D2 and 4He peaks. A
compromise must be reached. Indeed high partial pressures of 4He admitted to the 
mass spectrometer imply, due to N2 and D2 in the can-ying gas, an overall high 
pressure in the ionization chamber. As a consequence broadening of the mass peaks 
occurs. This requires an increase of the resolution to be used which, in turn, reduces 
the mass spectrometer sensitivity. 

Neutron detector: 
A new high efficiency neutron detector has been used in the present 
experiment. It has been designed and manufactured, according to our specifications, 
by Jomar Systems Division of Canbetrn Indust1ies Inc. Its design derives from 
detectors developed for the passive assay of plutonium in solid waste drums through 
non-destructive measurement system3 in the advanced version used by H. Menlove 
also for cold-fusion expe1iments4. Complete descliption of the detector with its 
perfmmances, experimental results and Monte Carlo simulations will be reported in a 
paper in preparation; here we summaiize the main charactelistics. The new neutron 
detector consists of 60 3He-proportional tubes of 41 cm active length, 2.54 cm
diameter and 6 atm gas pressure. These tubes are embedded in a cylindrical 
polyethylene moderator. The detector is segmented in twelve independent counters 
consisting of five tubes each, a1rnnged in inner and outer rings of six counters. The 
positions of the central tubes of each counter are stacked of half counter length 
between the inner and outer ring (see Fig. 3). The torus containing the ten 
electrochemical cells is suITounded by the detector and the localisation of the cell at 
the migin of the neutron emission can be obtained through the analysis of the pattern 
of the counts registered by the different twelve counters. 

Figure 3. Neutron detector. Location of counters and cells. 

If the emission is burst-like, the time correlated counts ( with time coITelation 
consistent with the die-away time of the detector) should affect contiguous numbered 
counters of the inner and outer rings facing the cell where the emission has occurred. 

The efficiency of the detector measured with a source of Californium-252 
placed in the different positions of the ten cells is 22%. The dependence of the 
efficiency on the cell position is limited to less than 1 %. The counts are essentially 
distiibuted among three or four contiguous numbered counters shared between inner 
and outer tings. This disuibution should allow the identification of the emitting cell if 
bursts of neutrons occur or if random generated emissions of neutrons happen at a 
rate substantially higher than the background. In the present conditions of the 
experiment the background of the whole detector is about 1 count/s that means about 
0.3 counts/s in a group of four contiguous numbered counters. The signals from eacl :
group of five tubes are processed by an AMPTEK A-111 hybrid charge-sensitive 
pre-amplifier/discriminator5 that gives then, as output of the counter, both the digital 
and the linear OR of the five tubes. The scheme of the electronics used to derive and 
acquire the inf01mation from the detector is shown in Fig. 4. Digital output of each 
counter is sent to two scaler one of which is read and reset at fixed time interval and 
the other is read and reset only at the end of a rnn lasting several days. 

Figure 4. Simplified scheme of neutron detector electronics 

In parallel it is sent to a Pattern Unit in order to detect all the counters hired 
within the time allowed by the acquisition cycle time (at present of the order of 1 ms) 
Moreover it is used to have a logical OR of all the twelve counters. The logical OR i: 
elaborated in order to measure with a TDC, for each neutron detected, the time 
interval between it and the following one. The logical OR is also sent to the Jomar 
JSR-12 Neutron Coincidence Analyzer6. The main purpose of the JSR-12 is to act a: 
a filter in order to enhance the capability of detecting time-coll"elated counts through 
its scaler R. In fact, each time a neutron is detected, a scaler T (Total) is incremented 
by a single count and two intervals of time are opened. the first one staiting few µs 
after the detection and the second after about 1 ms. In the first gate both random 
neutrons and neutrons c01Telated with that one that has allowed the gate to be openec 
are expected, while in the second gate only random neutrons are waited due to the 
large interval of time elapsed in respect to the die-away time of the detector. The 
counts in the first gate increment in non-linear way the R+A (Real + Accidentals) 
scaler of JSR-12; while those in the second one increment the A scaler. The two gate 
are opened for each neutron detected, then the increment of R+A is equal to the sum 
of the neutrons detected in each opened gate. When N neutrons are emitted in a very 
short time interval and all detected within the time interval of a single gate, the 
increment of the R+A scaler is equal to N(N-1)/2. The comparison of R+A and A 
scalers allows to estimate the number of correlated neutrons. The background value 
of this R+A scaler during the expe1iment was about 0.5/min. i.e., about a factor 
hundred less than the background value of total counter T. These counts are due 
essentially to cosmic rays spallation neutrons. The background value of the A scaler 
was a factor hundred less than the R+A value. 

The twelve analogic signals from the twelve counters are amplified and then 
sent to a linear fan in-fan out from which two linear OR of these signals come out. 
The first one goes to a wave form digitizer, a digital oscilloscope, which pe1mits to 
acquire the inf01mation on each pulse including the absolute time (given with a 
precision of ns) and the wave fo1m; the second goes to an ADC that digitizes its 
integral and sends the value obtained directly to a histogramming memory. Scaler , 
pattern unit, TDC, ADC and histogramming memory are CAMAC modules and are 
read through CAMAC BUS by a crate controller d1iven by a Macintosh II personal 
computer through a GPIB IEEE port that drives also the oscilloscope. The computer 
reads the pattern unit at each occurrence of CAMAC Look At Me (LAM) signal and 
reads the histogramming memory and the scalers each ten minutes. The (LAM) signal 
is emitted when the pattern unit has received at least one logic pulse from the detector. 
Besides, in order to minimize the time spent in readout, the computer does not read 
the oscilloscope until this has acquired a fixed number of pulses (block). This 
number is limited by the storing capability of the oscilloscope and depends on the 
choice of the number of points by which the pulse is digitized. Typical figures are: 
l(X) points for each pulse and 1000 wavefmms/block acquired before the computer 
reads the oscilloscope. 


3. Results

Calorimetry 
In order to give a synthetic view of the calorimet1ic data, we will use Table 3 
to summaiize the results obtained in all the cells and the related plots, assumed as 
typical, will be shown only for cell #5. 

Dming the expe1iment, lasted more than 650 h, the cuLTent applied to the 
cells, which are connected in series, was changed both in step-fashion and modulated 
high-low according to a square-wave. 
 
Figure 5. A. Profile of the current throughout the experiment. B. Excess power 
measured on cell #5. 

Figure 5 shows the profile of the cmTent applied to the cells and the measured 
excess power (cell #5) throughout the entire experiment. 

The same excess power repo1ted in fig. 5 is co1Telated with the input power in 
figure 6 below. In the same figure, the inset gives the i1T trend with respect to the 
same power input range. 

In Table 3 below, the integrated heat, Q, is calculated for 535 h where the heat 
production was at sufficient rate. The column, cPexclPin)%, has to be intended as the 
maximum yield found and, in column Pin, the con-esponding input power. For cells
#1 and #8 any appreciable excess power was found. 

Figure 6. Excess power as a function of input power, Pin, at cell #5. In the inset,
i1T=Ts-Tj vs Pin compared with the calibration curve of cell #5.

Table 3. Summar of excess data found 

At present, the best sensitivity has been attained by valving off pumping in the 
ionization region; pressure in this region, dming measurement, was 4xl()-5 mbar . 
Typical resolution used, as from the half height measurement, is M/L1M = 930. 
Attempts are cmTently being made in order to increase the ratio between 4He and the
other gases admitted to the mass spectrometer by employing selective membranes. 
Recent data confitm that our procedure allows to eliminate D2 from the electrolysis 
gas mixture at least in the limit of the mass spectrometer resolution. More details will 
be given in a paper in preparation. 

Tritium measurements:
As reported elsewhere1,2, our procedure allows to detennine tritium both in 
the solution and in recombined gases. Figure 7 shows both the trends throughout the 
expe1iment. To compare with respect to electrolytic enrichment, data are plotted 
against the charged, fidt, passed through the cell at time t. 

Figure 7. T1itium activity as measured throughout the expe1iment. Lower points 
COITespond to the activity measured in recombined gases. 

Neutron measurements:
The analysis of all the infonnation acquired dming the expe1iment is still in 
progress. No evidence of neutron emission has been found in the analysis of the total 
counts integrated in 10 minutes time intervals. Even if our background level is very 
high, we can exclude the occmTence in the present expe1iment of events generating 
flux of thousands neutrons per second, seen in some previous expe1iment, lasting 
even few seconds. 

The analysis of the coITelated neutron events (R scaler) with the parallel 
analysis of the pulses wave fonn has shown the occuITence of several events whose 
pulse lasts for several hundreds of µs with overlapping of pulses and which give a 
big increment of the R scaler. The characte1ization of such anomalous events is still 
underway, aiming to check the digitized wavef01m of all the pulses acquired dming 
all the ten minutes time intervals in which a value of R different from the background 
value has been found. Such analysis is extended also to characterize sporadic events 
occmTed dming the background acquisition with abno1mal R scaler increment, in 
order to asses or reject a possible different nature between the events occmTing when 
the electrolysis process is active from those occuning when the process is stopped. 


4. Discussion

We briefly discuss the main aspects emerging from the above results. A more 
detailed discussion will be given elsewhere. Concerning the heat excess, we observe 
that we found, in a quite reproducible way with respect to our previous findings2, a 
st1ict coITelation of heat excess from the applied input power. As it appears from Fig. 
6, the excess power is an increasing function of the input power. This behaviour is 
broken all the times the cuITent is set to zero (see also Fig. 5). This seems to be in 
agreement with the hypotheses that cold.fusion is feasible only if the O/Pd ratio is 
above a certain c1itical value and the loading of Pd by D is a process occuning under 
a gradient of electrochemical potential, as already pointed out in literature 7. We can 
also observe that the maximum value of the excess power yield is located in the input 
power range from 20 to 25 W (see Table 3) and this is associated both to the 
maximum excess power and a given current modulation, as repo11ed for cell #5, in 
fig.5A,B. In fact, from the same figure, we can observe that excess power is 
particularly enhanced from the pe,iod of the current modulation instead of its 
amplitude. This is consistent with D diffusion time into Pd, == x2/d (x=f/J/2 in our 
samples, d=diffusion coefficient). Therefore, in the procedure adopted, we obtained 
that the maximum of excess power as well as the maximum LiT did not correspond to 
the maximum value of the input power. This, if further confiimed, seems to be 
promising to develop the principles for practical applications of the cold.fusion. 

Concerning the production of nuclear particles, the present preliminary results 
seems to confiim both our previous results2 and the general trend of cold.fusion 
expe,iments in which the nuclear paiticles are not systematically observed as expected 
by the scheme of the plasma fusion reactions, if compared to the excess heat found. 
This is still the main question to which a satisfactory answer has not yet given. As 
shown in this Conference and in literature fmther experiments are still needed to 
confinn 4He production associated to the excess heat. Our efforts are also oriented to 
give cont1ibutions accordingly. 


References 
Gozzi D. et al., 1992, J Fusion Technology. 21, 60
Gozzi D. et al., Multicell Experiments for Searching Time-Related
Events in Cold Fusion, Proc. 2nd Int. Conference on Cold Fusion,
Villa Olmo, Como, June 29 - July 4, 1991, 1991, Conference Proceedings
33, 21, Societ.a ltaliana di Fisica, Bologna
Birkhoff G., Bondar L., Ley J., Berg R., Swennen R., Busca G., " On the
Detennination of the Pu-240 in Solid Waste Containers by Spontaneous
Fission Neutron Measurements. Application to Reprocessing Plant Waste."
Joint Nuclear Research Center lspra Establishement, 197 5, EUR 5158e;
Bohne! K., "Die Plutoniumbestimmung in Kerbrennstoffen mit der
Neutronen Koinzidenzmethode." Kernfoschungzentrum Karlsruhe, 1975,
KfK 2203
K1ick M.S. and Menlove H.O., "The High-Level Neutron Coincidence
CounLer 
(HLNCC): User's Manual." Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory,
1979 LA-7779-M
Menlove H.O. and Miller M.C., 1990, Nucl Instr and Meth A299, 10
Swansen J.E., 1985, Nucl.Instr.and Meth. B9, 80
Swansen J.E., Collinsworth P.R. and Krick M.S., 1980, Nucl Instr.and
Meth. , 176, 555; Menlove H.O. and Swansen J.E., Nucl Techn. 71,497
Tomellini M. and Gozzi D., 1990, J. Materials Science Lett., 9, 836

