1. Introduction

Palladium tubes have normally been used as ﬁlters of
hydrogen (deuterium) gas to attain the highest purity
because hydrogen (deuterium) gas has a greater diffusion
coefﬁcient through palladium than that of any other gas [1, 2].

This diffusion coefﬁcient dramatically increases when the
temperature of the palladium increases [3, 4]. Hence, the
palladium tube is usually heated to red heat in order to switch on
an instant source of pure hydrogen (deuterium) in experiments
(such as gas discharge devices, ion sources for accelerators,
etc). Hence temperature variation was not examined when the
hydrogen (deuterium) was passing through the thin ﬁlm of the
palladium tube. However, when we studied the calorimetric
behaviour of the deuterium/palladium system, an unexpected
phenomenon was observed of temperature rising unexpectedly
when the hydrogen (deuterium) gas was pumped out from the
palladium wire. As the hydrogen (deuterium) leaving from
the palladium wire was believed to be an endothermic process,
we expected to observe a temperature drop when the hydrogen
(deuterium) gas started to leave the palladium wire. In one
series of experiments, the palladium wire was heated by an
electrical current ﬂow inside the palladium wire; hence, the
temperature rise might have been caused by several effects
such as the change in the electrical resistance of the Pd wire,
and/or variation of the heat transfer coefﬁcients. We therefore
decided to use a Calvet calorimeter to detect this exothermic
effect because the Calvet calorimeter is based on the Seebeck
effect, which does not rely on heat transfer coefﬁcients. In this
new series of experiments, not only was this exothermic effect
conﬁrmed, but it was also correlated with the deuterium ﬂux
permeation of the thin ﬁlm of palladium.


2. Apparatus

Figure 1. Schematic view of the high-precision calorimeter (Calvet
C-80 D).

Figure 1 shows a schematic view of the apparatus in this
experiment with a thin palladium tube plugged into the reaction
vessel of a Calvet calorimeter, which is composed of a series
of thermal couples and by two reaction vessels (only one of
which is shown in ﬁgure 1). These thermocouples encircle
the reaction vessel in order to detect any heat ﬂow from any heat sources within the reaction vessel. In order to increase
precision, two identical vessels are arranged symmetrically
and are connected electrically in series in reversed polarity in
order to cancel the effect of the environment due to ﬂuctuation
in the ambient temperature. This palladium tube (26 mm × 0.1 mm × ⊘4 mm) is sealed at one end, and deuterium gas:
is fed through the other end. The reaction vessel is pumped
by a vacuum pump through the co-axial tube at the top of the
reaction vessel in order to generate a pressure difference across
the thin wall of the palladium tube. The deuterium ﬂux through
the thin wall is very low because the diffusion coefﬁcient of
hydrogen (deuterium) gas in palladium at room temperature is
quite low. The Calvet calorimeter has been designed to heat
the two vessels homogeneously using heaters embedded in the
insulator surrounding the two vessels. This Calvet calorimeter
(C-80D) was imported from a French company (Setaram), and
it is designed to be sensitive to a heat ﬂow of 1 µW, and it
has been calibrated with a standardized vessel equipped with
a standard electrical heater. When we heated the vessels and
the tube, the deuterium ﬂux across the thin wall of the Pd tube
gradually increased. This deuterium ﬂux was monitored by
the pressure in the reaction vessel while the pump still kept
running. All data for pressure, heat ﬂow, and temperature
were recorded by a data acquisition system controlled by
a computer. When the electrical heaters embedded in the
insulator were switched off, the temperature of the system
decreased gradually. Since the C-80 Calvet calorimeter is well
insulated in a big cylindrical insulator, the cooling process was
very slow. It usually took about 10 h to cool the system from
250˚C to 70˚C.


3. Results

Figure 2. Correlation between deuterium ﬂux and heat ﬂow;

Figure 2 shows the results of one of the experiments. The
Calvet calorimeter (C-80D) was ﬁrst uniformly heated to
200˚Cbytheheater. Deuteriumwasthenfedintothepalladium
tube inside the reaction vessel. After half an hour, the heater
was switched off. While the reaction vessel was cooling down,
the vacuum pump was working continuously in order to pump
out the permeating deuterium gas. The D2 pressure inside
the Pd tube was about 1.4 atm. The permeation rate was low;
hence, the pressure in the vessel was about 150 Pa. When
the temperature approached ∼150˚C (see the lower plot in
ﬁgure 2), the pressure in the reaction vessel started increasing
quickly although the pump was still working continuously. At
the same time the Calvet calorimeter recorded a heat ﬂow
(shown by the thick dash-dot-dash line in the upper plot of
ﬁgure 2). We then calculated the derivative of the pressure
with respect to time (dP/dt) in order to monitor the deuterium
ﬂux permeating the thin wall of the Pd tube. When thisdeuterium ﬂux reached a peak (shown by the thin solid line
in the upper plot of ﬁgure 2), the heat ﬂow also showed a
peak. When the temperature decreased further, the deuterium
ﬂux decreased to a valley while the heat ﬂow also showed
a valley. After the ﬁrst peak of deuterium ﬂux, there was a
second peak before 140˚C, and the heat ﬂow reached its second
peak in parallel. We carefully calculated the deuterium ﬂux in
order to consider the effect of the continuous pumping, and
we obtained the two peaks of the deuterium ﬂux as shown by
the thin solid curve in the upper plot of ﬁgure 2. There was a small time delay between the two sets of peaks. The peaks
of the deuterium ﬂux appeared a little earlier than the peaks
of the heat ﬂow. The time delay is about 240 s, and the time
constant of the Calvet calorimeter is just about 250 s. When
the temperature was lower than 140˚C, the deuterium pressure
inside the vessel started dropping because the deuterium ﬂux
diminished. The negative value of the heat ﬂow in ﬁgure 2
indicated an endothermic effect just after the deuterium ﬂux
had stopped. Probably, it had been caused by a desorption
process in the reaction vessel due to the dropping of D2 pressure
inside the vessel. This correlation between deuterium ﬂux and
the heat ﬂow was conﬁrmed 16 times with the same palladium
tube under various D2 pressure differences.


4. Discussion

(1) Permeation of deuterium through the thin wall of a
palladium tube has been supposed to be a diffusion process,
and the deuterium ﬂux assumed to be a monotonic function
of temperature, with the diffusion coefﬁcient of deuterium
gas inside the palladium decreasing when the temperature
decreases. However, what we observed was a different, up
and down trend. Moreover, it showed a double peak structure
that is not expected if the diffusion coefﬁcient, D, had followed
the conventional expression as in [5]:
Here, D0 and Ea, are two constants; T is the temperature
in Kelvin. It seems that there may have been some kind
Abnormal deuterium ﬂux and heat ﬂow in D/Pd system
of resonant process involved in the abnormal double peak
structure.

(2) This abnormal deuterium ﬂux with a double peak
structure seemed correlated with an exothermic process. We
might think of solution of deuterium into the palladium, and the
formation of deuteride inside the palladium, because both these
processes are exothermic. In order to check if this was true,
deuterium gas was fed into both sides of the Pd wall (i.e. the
reaction vessel and the palladium tube) and the experiment
run again. In this case, heat ﬂow was not observed when the
temperature of the palladium tube passed through the particular
temperature region. Hence, the deuterium ﬂux permeating the
thin wall of the palladium tube must be an important factor
for this heat ﬂow. We might assume that this resonant process
enhances the concentration of the deuterium atoms inside the
palladium lattice, where it enhances the ﬂux permeating the
thin wall of the palladium tube. Such a plausible assumption
seems supported by the dip after the double peak structure
of heat ﬂow in ﬁgure 2. After 52 500 s, the deuterium ﬂux
entering inner surface of the Pd tube approached zero; hence,
the continuous pumping in the reaction vessel was no longer
balanced by the inﬂux of the deuterium. Thus the density of
deuterons inside the wall of the palladium tube was decreasing.
Consequently, dissolution and desorption on the outer surface
of the Pd tube at the reaction vessel side could not be balanced
by the absorption and solution on the inner surface of the Pd
tube. Both the dissolution and the desorption are endothermic
processes that would cause the dip after 52 500 s.

(3) Joule–Thomson effect? When we tried to ﬁnd the
source of this heat ﬂow, at ﬁrst glance, there was a possibility
of the Joule–Thomson effect because the thin wall of the
palladium tube might be considered as a porous partition, and
the inversion temperature for hydrogen is 205 K. However,
this seemed impossible after qualitative consideration.

The Joule–Thomson effect is important only for high-pressure
and low-temperature gases that are far away from an ideal
gas. In our experiment the gas pressure was less than 2 atm, and 
the temperature was higher than 393 K, so that the Joule–Thomson effect is negligible.
In particular, the
deuterium ﬂux is very low (of the order of milliamperes),
so that based on the Joule–Thomson coefﬁcient for hydrogen
(−0.023 31 K atm−1), we may show that the heating power
due to the Joule–Thomson effect for our case is much less than 1 µW, which is negligible.

(4) Self-sustaining. It would be interesting if we were able
to maintain the temperature of the D/Pd system at a speciﬁc
point, say 150˚C, by the heat ﬂow itself. We might then keep
this exothermic process in a self-sustaining steady state. A new
system has been designed to test this idea, and preliminary
results are encouraging.


References

[1] Graham T 1866 Phil. Trans. R. Soc. 156 415
[2] Lewis F A 1966 Palladium/Hydrogen System (New York:
Academic) p 3
[3] Alefeld G and Volkl J 1978 Hydrogen in Metals, I, Basic
Properties (Berlin: Springer) p 325
[4] Alefeld G and Volkl J 1978 Hydrogen in Metals, II,
Application-Oriented Properties (Berlin: Springer) p 73
[5] Fukai Y 1993 The Metal–Hydrogen System, Basic Bulk
Properties (Berlin: Springer) p 230
