1. Introduction

The investigation of extreme states of matter under extremely high compression is
one of the most important areas of fundamental science. Especially important and
interesting is the search for ways to form “stellar” states of matter, with parameters
close to those which occur in astrophysical objects such as white dwarfs and neutron
stars, under the conditions of a terrestrial laboratory. Various theoretical models
predict the anomalous properties of both the very process of supercompression and
the synthesized superdense matter, including the possibility of great energy release
accompanying the process of self-supporting matter compression, the neutralization
of radioactive nuclei, and the formation of superheavy quasistable nuclei.

The problems of formation of extreme states of matter, and its use in solving the
applied tasks of nuclear physics, power engineering, and radiation ecology, are the
priority directions of the activity of a specialized laboratory for electrodynamical
studies of the “Proton-21” firm established in Kiev in 1999.


2. Facilities, methods, and main results of experiments

2.1. Facility
In the course of creation of the experimental base of the laboratory, the best
available methods for extremely strong matter compression were employed. At the
same time, while designing the experimental setup, a special emphasis was put on
the realization of scientific ideas developed by the creative staff and the laboratory
administration.1 We posed the problem of creating a setup which is able to ensure a
high energy concentration (from a coherent driver) in a solid target (with size of at
most 10–100µm) in the first stage of the impulse process. At the second stage, the
further self-supporting compression of this region up to a state of collapse on the
subangstrom-scale, and the attainment of the “stellar” matter state should occur

In the experimental setup (see Figure 1), an impulse electron beam with a total
energy of at most 1 kJ was used as a coherent driver in each cycle of supercompression (a schematic of the basic experiment under discussion in this paper is shown in
Figure 2). Both the compressed target, and the driver system ensuring the supercompression, were in a vacuum system. This guarantees maximum purity, control
over experiments, their reproducibility.1,2

The expected results concerning matter supercompression were derived on 24
February 2000.
The optimized structure of the experimental setup allows us to perform at least
10 different experiments on the supercompression of different targets in a day. At
present, the total number of experiments exceeds 5000. As target materials, we
have used practically all chemical elements from which one can manufacture a solid target. The majority of the targets under study were produced from chemically pure
elements, such as Cu (purity of 99.99%), Al(99.99%), Ta (99.97%), Pb (99.75%),
and Ag (99.99%).

The achieved understanding of the physical processes running during every experiment allows us to predict reliably (with a probability of about 100%) the results
of experiments for all variations in the operation modes of the setup, and in the
characteristics of targets under study.

2.2. Measurement systems
The results of action of a coherent driver in the experimental setup were investigated
with the use of several independent measurement systems:
After every experiment, the chemical, isotopic, radiometric, and structural analyses of the target materials were carried out; also analyses of the chamber walls and
special accumulating screens with different forms, materials, and structures which
were positioned in the vacuum region of the experimental setup, were carried out.
We measured the spectra of electromagnetic radiation from the collapse zone in
the microwave, visible, and gamma regimes.
We analyzed the products emitted from the collapse zone (electrons, positrons,
ions, charged and neutral nuclear particles and clusters) in real time.
In the implementation of the element and isotope analyses, the following methods
based on relevant facilities were used:
Electron probe microanalysis (EPMA)—analyzer REMMA 102 (Ukraine).
Auger-electron spectroscopy (AES)—Auger spectroscope JAMP-10S (JEON,
Japan).
Secondary ion mass-spectrometry (SIMS)—SIMS analyzer IMS 4f (Cameca,
France).
Laser mass-spectrometry (LMS).
Integral thermal ion mass-spectrometry (TIMS)—thermal ion mass-spectroscope
“Finnigan MAT-262.”
Glow discharge mass-spectrometer VG 9000 (Thermo Elemental, UK).
Rutherford backscattering of accelerated α-particles (RBS).
All together, more than 15 000 element and isotope analyses were performed, including those listed in Table 1:

2.3. Observations
During the experiments (on solid target supercompression to the collapsed state),
several anomalous phenomena were observed:
In the process of the collapse formation, and during its subsequent evolution for
100 ns, intense x-ray and gamma radiation (in the energy range from 2–3 keV to
10 MeV, with a maximum near 30 keV). The total radiation dose in the range
30–100 keV exceeded 50–100 krad at a distance of 10 cm from the active region
Synthesis of light, medium, and heavy chemical elements and isotopes (with 1 ≤
A ≤ 240); and fusion of superheavy transuranium elements (with 250 ≤ A ≤ 500)
in the area near the collapse zone. Some of these results are considered below.
All of the created elements and isotopes were stable (without alpha, beta, or
gamma activities).
Transformation of any radioactive nuclei to stable nuclei in the collapse zone. The
utilization efficiency of radionuclides per 1 kJ of the driver energy corresponds to
the transmutation of about 1018 target nuclei (e.g. 60Co) into nonradioactive
isotopes of other nuclei.
Unique spatial distribution of different chemical elements and isotopes (with
1 ≤ A ≤ 240) in the volume of an accumulating screen, which was made of a
chemically pure element and which was remote from the collapse zone (all the
created elements and isotopes were situated in the same thin layer, or several thin
layers, inside of the screen).

2.4. Results due to a new physical process
These results indicate that a previously unknown physical process, namely the
artificially-induced collapse of part of the target material, was realized at our laboratory for the first time. In every experiment, the collapse is completed by both
the full nuclear regeneration of a portion of the initial substance of the target with
a mass of 0.5–1 mg and the formation of artificially derived chemical elements instead of the initial atoms, including the long-lived and stable isotopes of superheavy
chemical elements which are not found on earth or in near space.

These phenomena can be interpreted (with a high probability) on the basis of the
idea of the creation and evolution of a self-organizing and self-supporting collapse
state of the electron-nucleus plasma (of an initial solid substance); to a state of
electron-nucleus clusters (with the density close to that of the nuclear substance)
under the action of a coherent driver. During the evolution of such a collapse, the
processes of fast fusion and creation of different isotopes (including trarnsuranium
ones), take place. After the end of the collapse, synthesized isotopes were detected
near the collapse zone, on the surface and in the volume of the remote accumulating
screen.
It was also suggested that, during the evolution of this cluster, the process of
emission of superheavy neutral nuclear clusters with A > 3000–5000 takes place.


3. Fusion of light, medium, and heavy nuclei

By analyzing the results of all experiments, we found a great number of elemental
and isotopic anomalies. The measurements were carried out at the institutes of the
National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine; at the Taras Shevchenko Kiev National
University; at one of the leading enterprises of the Ministry of Atomic Industry of
the Russian Federation; and at specialized mass-spectrometric laboratory of United
Metals Inc (USA).

After the implementation of every experiment, many chemical elements (with
atomic numbers both greater and smaller than those of initial chemically pure material) was measured on the target surface, and on the surface and in the volume of
accumulating screens. This amount is much larger than that of admixtures in the
initial materials of the target and accumulating screens (see, e.g. Table 2).

For the majority of the synthesized chemical elements, we observed a significant
deviation from the natural isotope ratio. For many elements, this ratio is changed
by 5–100 times (it can increase or decrease). Fig. 3 shows an example of a change in
the isotope ratio for certain elements registered after experiments. While analyzing
the samples, we found many nonidentified atomic masses in the transuranium region
with A > 250.

3.1. Single ions and molecular clusters
Performing the spectrometry of superheavy masses, we implemented special measures allowing us to prevent the appearance of molecular clusters:
We carried out a complex study of the same sample on several mass-spectrometers
of different types.
We used a special operation mode, “offset,” in a SIMS analyzer IMS 4f which
allowed us to highly efficiently separate molecular clusters and single ions.
While using a mass-spectrometer, we used the operation mode with a high temperature (about 100 eV) at the laser focus on the surface of the samples under
study. At this temperature, molecular complexes cannot exist and such a massspectrometer will register only single ions.
The investigation of superhigh masses was performed with the use of Rutherford
backscattering of accelerated alpha particles with an energy of 27.2 MeV derived
on a U-120 cyclotron. This method allows one to register only single ions. The results of a measurement of the backscattering spectrum are presented in Fig. 4
[Ref. 3].

These precautions enable us to assert that we detected nonidentified stable
atomic masses in the transuranium region with 250 <A< 500 on the samples
located near the action zone of the coherent driver. After every experiment, about
10–20 types of superhigh masses (superheavy nuclei) were measured; moreover, a
representative number of superheavy nuclei of each type equaled 107 to 1010. The
number of superheavy nuclei formed increases with use of a target made of heavy
atoms (e.g. Pb). Most frequently are registered superheavy nuclei with A = 271,
272, 330, 341, 343, 394, 433. The same superheavy nuclei were registered on the
same samples during repeated measurements over time intervals of a few months.


4. Spatial distribution

4.1. Anomalous atom distributions
While investigating the spatial distribution of products of the nucleosynthesis in the
volume of accumulating screens made of chemically pure materials (mainly Cu), we
found alien chemical elements (from H to Pb) in the amount which exceeded their
initial total amount in the form of admixtures by several orders (Table 2). All these
elements were positioned in several thin concentric layers. The first (superficial)
layer, about 200 ˚A thick, contained about 3 × 1018 atoms of all elements. The
second was located at a depth X ≈ 0.3 µm, and contained about 1018 atoms.
And the third was at X ≈ 7 µm. At the same time, we found a decrease in the
concentration of the initial material of a target in the volumes of these layers.

Let us consider possible mechanisms for the formation of a thin layer (containing
different elements and isotopes with the same spatial distribution) in the volume of
an accumulating screen made of a chemically pure element (e.g. Cu), and remote
from the action zone of a coherent driver in detail.4 A typical scheme of formation
of this layer in experiments is presented in Fig. 5. Figure 5. The typical scheme of formation of thin layer in the volume of an accumulating screen.

The depth profile shown in Fig. 6 was typical of all experiments. It was obtained by ionic etching the surface of an accumulating screen with an ion microprobe
analyzer Cameca IMS 4f. One can see in Fig. 6 that different chemical elements
(e.g. Au, Pr, La, I, Ce, W, and unidentified element 156A) are situated in the same
thin layer (with relative thickness ∆R/R ≈ 0.25 and distance R = X cos θ from
the surface into the depth of the accumulating screen in the direction outwards the
collapse zone). The distance R and thickness ∆R are the same for the whole layer
and all chemical elements for a single experiment. For different experiments, the
values of R and ∆R may be different, but the ratio ∆R/R is the same. Figure 6. Depth profile of chemical elements in an accumulating screen

The synthesized elements and isotopes were distributed over the layer surface
as separate clusters. At the center of the screen, the clusters overlapped. Cluster
distributions for Al, B, Si, and K on the layer surface are presented in Fig. 7. Note
that the distributions are the same in all details. This result can be obtained only
if all detected elements were born in each cluster during the nuclear transmutation
of unknown particles. Figure 7. Distribution of clusters of chemical elements B, Al, Si, K on the same very small area
on the surface of a thin layer.

It is easy to make sure that such distributions over the surface and radius cannot
be a result of the ordinary process of Coulomb deceleration for different fast ions.
For such a Coulomb deceleration, the energy losses dE/dr and the deceleration
distance R of an ion with mass M, charge Z, and energy E are
Here, J is the averaged ionization potential of atoms of the screen. On the one hand,
at the same deceleration distance R = 0.3 µm in a copper target, the values of the
initial energies E are very different for different ions (e.g. we need EH ≈ 60 keV for
H+ and EPb ≈ 60 MeV for Pb+). The same dispersion of Ei will hold for ions with different charges. On the other hand, for different ions at the same energy E, the
ratio of deceleration distances Ri is also very high (e.g. for H+ and Pb+, we have
RH/RPb > 20–30).

The total number of alien atoms considerably exceeded that of the starting admixture; therefore, such a unique distribution cannot be created by the nonlinear
waves of admixtures which are observed sometimes in nonequlibrium processes. In
addition, the three-dimensional character of the anomalous distribution of synthesized chemical elements (different elements were located in small coincident regions
on the surfaces of concentration layers) cannot be explained by the processes of
transport or diffusion as well.

The observed distribution of chemical elements (the fixed values of ∆R and R
for different particles in each single experiment) in the layer may appear only in the
case of deceleration in the depth of the screen of identical particles with the same
charge and energy. But such a distribution is observed for different elements (from
H to Pb)! So, we are faced with a paradox in this case. We suppose that such a distribution of different chemical elements and isotopes is
possible only if the following conditions are met:
(1) All initial (decelerated and stopped) particles must be the same (identical).
(2) For the stability of the charge of particles, their velocities V must be lower relative
to the velocity v0 = e2/h = 2.5 × 108 cm/s of valence electrons.
(3) For a large distance of deceleration R at a low velocity V  v0, the mass M of an
unknown particle must be very large.
(4) Different chemical elements and isotopes observed in the screen layer are created
by the nuclear transmutation of these identical particles after stopping at R.
What is the nature of these unknown superheavy particles and the mechanism of
the fast nuclear transmutation to different final stable nuclei? This problem will be
discussed below.

4.2. Deceleration of heavy particles by elastic scattering
We have investigated the possible mechanism of elastic deceleration of these unknown particles, and we have calculated their parameters. The equation of motion
of the unknown uncharged particles with mass M in the bulk of the screen is the
following:
is the mean force of elastic deceleration of the unknown heavy particle in the screen.
The momentum change ∆p satisfies
∆p is the deceleration of the particle momentum for ∆t  δt (during ∆N = ∆t/δt
single collisions with ions of the target with mass M0), where the time between
single collisions is
and the distance l1 satisfies
This distance is the interval between two subsequent collisions of the unknown heavy
particle with ions of the target. In addition,
is the deceleration momentum of a particle during a single collision.
The solution of Eq. (2) is
The deceleration terminates at a time t = τ when the kinetic energy of the particle
(MV 2(τ ))/2) becomes equal to the thermal energy (M0v2
T/2) of the atoms (ions)
in the screen

The duration of the deceleration is
The deceleration distance is
The mass of the unknown particle is
Here, T = E(0) = MV (0)2/3 is the initial energy of the unknown particle after
leaving the action zone of the coherent driver, and T0 = M0v2
T/3 is the temperature
of the screen.

Let us make numerical estimates. For a screen made of chemically pure copper (A0 ≈ 63 − 65), the concentration and elastic scattering cross section are
n ≈ 8×1022 cm−3 and σ ≈ 10−16 cm2, respectively. With an experimental value
of the distance of deceleration R(τ ) ≈ 0.4 µm and at T0 = 300 K = 0.025 eV, and
T= 35 keV, we have the very large mass of the unknown particle: M ≈ 91 M0, A ≈
91A0 ≈ 5700. The initial velocity of these superheavy particles was low relative to
the velocity of the valence electrons (v0 = e2/h = 2.5×108 cm/s), and was equal to
V (0) = (3T /M)1/2 ≈ 3.7 × 106 cm/s. The total duration of particle deceleration is
τ ≈ 0.8× 10−9 s. In a different case (e.g. for a layer situated at a different distance
of deceleration R(τ ) ≈ 7 µm), we have M ≈ 1540M0 and A ≈ 1540A0 ≈ 100 000.
The obtained parameters correspond to requirements (1–3).


5. Possible model for evolution of neutralized superheavy nuclei

We assume that these superheavy particles are similar to abnormal superheavy
neutralized nuclei that were proposed by A. Migdal about 20 years ago.5,6 Migdal
obtained the important result consisting in that the energy E/A of the nuclear substance has two minima (the first “ordinary” at A ≈ 60, and the second “abnormal”
at Amax ≥ 2 × 105). Migdal suggested that the presence of the second “abnormal”
minimum of energy E/A was a result of the Fermi condensation of pions in the
volume of superheavy nucleus (e.g. during the action of a shock). These minima
are separated by a high potential barrier at Z0 ≈ (hc/e2)3/2 ≈ 1600. The mechanism for the suppression of the action of that barrier will be discussed below. If this hypothesis is correct, then superheavy neutralized nuclei created in the active
zone of a coherent driver can absorb environmental “ordinary” nuclei of the target
(screen). This transmutation leads to a growth of these superheavy neutralized
nuclei by nuclear fusion up to Amax.

Very few electrons are outside the volume of these nuclei in a thin skin with
thickness about 10−12 cm. The probability of such a synthesis is very high due to
the high transparency of the Coulomb barrier. Energy is released during such a
fusion reaction. Different channels are available for the release of the excess energy
(gamma emission, the emission of neutrons and nuclear fragments, etc.). One of the
channels is connected with the creation of different “normal” nuclei, and the mission
of these nuclei from the volume of a growing superheavy nucleus. For example, after
the absorption of several target nuclei with AT ≈ 50 − 200 in a short time, a high
binding energy can lead to the emission of several light nuclei with AL < AT, or
one heavy nucleus with AH ≈ 300 − −500 > AT (see Fig. 8). Figure 8. Evolution of superheavy nucleus – absorption of target nuclei and creation of different
nuclei (from H up to stable transuranium nuclei)

The process of nucleus emission competes with other ways for cooling the nuclear substance. In this case, usual even–even nuclei (like the alpha particle, and
C12, O16, ..., Pb208) which already exist in the volume of a superheavy nucleus,
are more likely to emerge and be emitted. In fact, every superheavy nucleus is a
“specific microreactor” for the transmutation of “normal” target nuclei to different
configurations of nucleons. In this microreactor, the transmutation process terminates after the utilization of all target nuclei, or after the evolution of a superheavy
nucleus to the final stable state with Amax. How are such superheavy nuclei created?

We have carried out an analysis of the evolution of nuclei in the action zone of the coherent driver. It follows from our calculation that for some usual (not
superheavys) but “critical” nuclei (e.g. at Z>Zcr ≈ 92) at special parameters of
the coherent driver, the process of fast and self-controlling change (decrease) of the
energy of nucleons (an increase in the binding energy) takes place. The value Zcr
depends on the driver parameters. For a more intense driver, Zcr will be less. It
also follows that the minimum of this energy is changed in time from the initial
(usual) value at Aopt ≈ 60 to Aopt ≥ 104. All “subcritical” nuclei with Z<Zcr
have stable minimum of energy at Aopt ≈ 60. This effect is connected with the
self-similar processes in the superdense degenerate electron-nucleon plasma with a
suppressed influence of the Coulomb interaction between protons in the volume of
a superheavy nucleus. The coherent driver should start this self-amplifying process
of nuclear transformation for “critical” nuclei.

We have calculated the energy change per nucleon (E/A) for different relations
of the electron and proton concentrations for “critical” nuclei at 30<A< 2 × 105.
During the initial phase of the process (at the shift of the minimum of the energy
per nucleon E/A to Aopt ≈ 5000 − −10, 000), the role of pionic condensation is
slight, but it becomes critical at Aopt ≥ 105. The degenerate electron-nucleus
plasma initially includes a mixture of all nuclei (normal stable nuclei, and growing
superheavy ones) and electrons, and is prevented from decaying due to the action
(pressure) of the coherent driver. The description of such processes will be presented elsewhere.

During such a change of the E/A ratio for superheavy nuclei, the fusion process
for target nuclei (the absorption of target nuclei with “subcritical charge” Z<Zcr,
and the growth of “critical” nuclei with Z>Zcr) in the action zone of the coherent
driver becomes possible (see Fig. 9). This fusion leads to a fast growth of initial
“critical” nuclei up to A ≈ 104 – 105 during the action time of the coherent driver
(about ∆td ≤ 100 ns) with velocity (dA/dt)collapse ≈ A/∆td ≈ 1012 to 1013 s−1.
This velocity is proportional to the concentration of nuclei in the target. This
process may lead to the creation of nuclei with 1 <A< 300 − 500. The scheme of
creation of these nuclei and the scheme reviewed above during the analysis of the
processes occurring in the accumulating screen are the same.

After the termination of the compressing action of a coherent driver, the process
of decay of the degenerate electron-nucleus plasma, which includes the mixture of
all nuclei (normal stable nuclei of the target, growing superheavy nuclei, and created
nuclei) due to nuclear reactions, takes place. Some of these superheavy nuclei hit
the remote accumulating screen and are decelerated there.

The growth velocity of these nuclei in the volume of a solid accumulating screen
is proportional to the concentration of nuclei nscreen and equals
After the deceleration of these superheavy nuclei in the screen during τ ≈ 10−9 s,
the process of growth proceeds for
We suppose that the above scenario gives a quite full explanation for all the abnormal results obtained in the course of experiments. The full theory of formation of
laboratory electron-nuclear collapse in volume of condensed target and the ways of
transmutation of nuclear subsystem in such collapse area are presented in [7-9].


References

1. S. V. Adamenko, Bulletin of National Academy of Science of Ukraine, 2, 23 (2003).
2. S. V. Adamenko and A. S. Adamenko, International Symposium “New Projects and
Lines of Research in Nuclear Physics”, Abstracts of contributed papers, (Messina,
Italy, October 2002), p. 19.
3. S. V. Adamenko and A. A. Shvedov, International Symposium “New Projects and
Lines of Research in Nuclear Physics”, Abstracts of contributed papers, (Messina,
Italy, October 2002), p. 41.
4. S. V. Adamenko and V. I. Vysotskii, International Symposium “New Projects and
Lines of Research in Nuclear Physics”, Abstracts of contributed papers, (Messina,
Italy, October 2002), p. 43.
5. A. B. Migdal, Fermions and Bozons in Strong Fields, (Moscow, Nauka, 1978) [in Russian].
6. A. B. Migdal, D. N. Voskresensky, E. K. Sapershtein and M. A. Troitsky, Pion Degrees
of Freedom in Nuclear Matter, Moscow, Nauka, (1991). (In Russian).
7. Adamenko S. V., Vysotskii V. I. “Mechanism of synthesis of superheavy nuclei via the
process of controlled electron-nuclear collapse,” Foundations of Physics Letters, 17,
203-233 (2004).
8. Adamenko S. V., Vysotskii V. I. “Evolution of annular self-controlled electron-nucleus
collapse in condensed targets,” Foundations of Physics, 34, 1801-1831 (2004).
9. Adamenko S. V., Vysotskii V. I. “The problem of Coulomb collapse of electron-nucleus
system in condensed targets,” Surface, p. 30-38 (2005). (In Russian)


