1) INTRODUCTION
In March 1989 M. Fleischmann and S. Pons [1] reported that a sizeable excess of enthalpy,
accompanied by a very tiny amount of radioactivity, had been detected in electrolytic cells
with Palladium (Pd) cathodes during the electrolysis of D2O, provided that the stoichiometric
ratio x=[D]/[Pd] of Deuterium in Pd had reached a critical threshold. This announcement
sparked a good deal of controversy which convinced many established journals to neglect the
topic altogether [2].

The main point at issue was that the claimed excesses of enthalpy were consistent only with a
nuclear process (fusion of Deuterons) and that such a process at ambient temperature and
without the emission of a commensurate number of neutrons was considered to be
inconsistent with modern nuclear science. A possible theoretical understanding of the reported
phenomenon was proposed by Bressani, Del Giudice and Preparata [3], just in the aftermath
of Fleischmann-Pons announcement. We refer to Appendix A for a more detailed discussion
of such a model.  According to this model, 4He should be expected to be the final product of
this newly discovered form of nuclear fusion.

In the following years many reports of excess heat and Helium have been published, but so
far no convincing experiment has been published, where the loading x, the excess heat and the
Helium production are simultaneously measured as a function of short time intervals (less
than 1 hour). An experimental programme aimed at probing the phenomenological
consequences of the above theoretical proposal has been launched at ENEA. The programme
aims at the experimental demonstration that:

i) an electric potential  applied along a one-dimensional cathode (a wire or a deposited stripe)
is able to depress the chemical potential of D in Pd (for x > 0.7) and enhance the rate of
loading (Preparata effect) [4];

ii) when x becomes larger than 1, excess heat is generated;

iii) 4He is simultaneously generated, commensurate with the level of the excess enthalpy.

The implementation of this programme has lasted a number of years and it has required
solving many technological problems. In the present paper we report a first set of
experimental results.


2) THE EXPERIMENTAL SETUP

A simplified block diagram of our experimental lay-out is shown in Fig. 1. It basically consist
of a small (8.5 cm3) electrolytic cell (Fig. 2a) whose electrodes, kept 5 mm apart, are an
anode made of a Platinum sheet and a cathode made of a Pd stripe sputtered on an inert
surface, wound in the so-called “bustrophedic”1 geometry (Fig. 2b). The stripe is typically
100 cm long, 50 µm wide and 2 µm thick and, when empty, has an electrical resistance R0 of
about 3KΩ at room temperature. The cell is filled with 5.5 ml of 10-4 M LiOD solution,
having a conductivity of 104 ± 1 µS/cm. The electrical scheme of the experimental lay-out is
given in Fig. 3.

The production of stable stripes has required considerable efforts.  During the absorption of
D, the lattice parameter increases by up to 10% of its length [5], inducing large stresses in the
sample [6]. Suitable choices of the substrate, of the sputtering parameters and of the etching
technique (used to pattern the film) have been necessary in order to achieve very robust
cathodes, capable to survive several load/unload cycles at room temperature.

The amount of D loading is estimated by measuring the ratio of the electrical resistances R/R0
(where R0 is the resistance of the empty palladium matrix) which is related to the loading
Bustrophedic means the geometry of the furrows cut in the ground from the plough driven by an ox (from
west to east and from nort to south)

Fig.1 - Principle diagram of the cell and of the helium sampling circuit. The cell is enclosed in a ultra high
vacuum (UHV) containment vessel and kept in thermal contact with a Peltier element. The cell is located inside
a box, thermo-regulated within ± 0.01 °C.  Gases from the cell are collected inside a storage volume. A fraction
of the gas mixture (sample volume) is periodically sent to the NEG pump and then to the quadrupole mass
analizer (QMA). The non evaporable getter (NEG) pump, removes to a high degree all non inert components of
the gas mixture (especially hydrogen isotopes).

Fig. 2 - a) View of the electrolytic cell; b) sketch of the one dimensional (bustrophedic) cathode.

through a well known relationship, verified for a homogeneously loaded sample [7].
Differences between the measured maximum value of R/R0 and the value given in the
literature are probably due to a non homogeneous deuterium concentration along the sample.

Fig. 3 - Electrical layout of the experiment. In order to perform the resistance measurement, electric switches
exclude the electrolytic current during the DC resistance measurement.

The thin film cathode substrate is kept in good thermal contact with a commercial Peltier
element. During a calibration we have obtained a linear relationship between the power
dissipated in the cell and the voltage displayed across the contacts of the Peltier element.
Heat dissipated in the cell produces an increase of the temperature of both the electrolyte and
the electrodes: the proportionality factor between the power dissipated and the temperature
(voltage) increase is 17.3±0.3 mW/mV.

The gas mixture flowing from the cell contains mainly O2 and D2 with a very small amount
of 4He. In such conditions, the Helium peak separation by mass spectrometry is not easy,
since the e/m values of D2 and 4He are very near to each other. In order to reduce such a large
background signal we have introduced at the exit of the cell a non evaporable getter (NEG)
pump, in order to remove to a high degree all non inert components of the gas mixture
(especially hydrogen isotopes). Obviously, all inert gases are preserved. We have found
necessary to avoid the use of cryosorption pumps, since they have been found to trap Helium
erratically in the condensate.

During the measurement, the gas is periodically sampled, without influence on the electrolytic
process.

According to recommended practice, the high resolution Quadrupole Mass Analyzer (QMA)
has been carefully calibrated with pure N2, Ar, 4He and D2. Specific 4He and Ar calibrations
have been carried out statically (“pseudo-static” method), introducing known amounts of gas
in the analyzer. The pressure inside the analysis chamber has been monitored by the same ion
gauge used for dynamic calibrations, in order to compare the results. The two methods exhibit
an excellent agreement.

As already pointed out, getter pumps ensure that virtually all the Deuterium initially present
in the gaseous mixture is removed.  The absence of a dominant Deuterium peak, which is
however well resolved by the mass spectrometer, improves considerably the ultimate
sensitivity to 4He. Checks with 4He -D2 mixtures (about 67% - 33% and 50%) have been
performed. The partial pressures of the two components have been calculated by dividing the
intensities of the two peaks (after the subtraction of cross contributions) by the corresponding
sensitivity for the pure gases, and accounting for the relative sensitivity of the hot cathode ion
gauge (a conversion factor 6 for 4He and 2.6 for D2). Measured concentrations are in good
agreement with nominal compositions.

The experimental setup has been extensively calibrated throughout the last two years. The
facility provides reliable and precise measurements of the content of inert components in any
gas mixture. Figure 4 is a typical residual spectrum of an air sample. All non inert
components have been removed effectively in just a few tens of seconds. A mixture with a
known composition (82% 4He - 13.5% N2 - 4.5% CO2) has been used for quantitative tests.
Samples of the mixture were introduced at different pressures in the analyzer, according to the
pseudo-static method. The 4He concentration in the mixture samples was measured to be 86.5
± 0.6%, in reasonable agreement with the nominal value, taking into account that the
procedure used to fill the sample volume, through a metering valve and a capillary tube,
unavoidably gives rise to some helium enrichment of the mixture downstream. The linear fit
of the experimental data (Fig. 5) shows the very high precision of the measurement.

A “memory effect” has also been detected. When pure helium or the above mentioned
mixture sample are admitted to the analyzer, the ion current at mass 4 suddenly rises as
expected to a rigorously constant value. A different behavior is instead observed with air
samples.  After the initial step, the ion current at mass 4 begins to slowly increase with time.
Similar effect is not exhibited by the Argon signal.

This effect is reduced significantly soon after baking of the QMA ultra high vacuum (UHV)
chamber; it then appears again and becomes more and more evident (Fig. 6) as the
experiments proceed. This fact obviously suggests that 4He is to some extent adsorbed on the
walls of the analysis chamber and successively released.

Fig 4 - Typical residual spectrum of an air sample. Getter pumps effectively remove non inert components.
Noble gases are preserved as shown by dominant peaks of Ar+ (mass 40)  and Ar+ + (mass 20). The high
resolution insert shows that also 4He is preserved, while D2 has been completely removed.

Fig. 5 - In order to test the performance of the system we measured the helium content of a gas mixture having a
known composition. The high quality of the linear fit accounts for the very high precision of the measurement.
The quantitative agreement between the measured and the nominal contents accounts for the accuracy of the
measurement (see details in text).

Fig. 6 - Helium atoms are stripped from the  vacuum chamber walls due to the ion bombardment by other
species. We have measured the 4He outgassing rate versus the total pressure in the analysis chamber. The
outgassing, which is very small soon after the baking of the vacuum system, becomes significant after some
measurement. This effect must be accounted for during the elaboration of the experimental data.

We have suspected that the co-presence of a much larger amount of Argon, during air tests, is
responsible for this effect, due to the bombardment of the walls by the Argon atoms.  We
have checked this hypothesis, by injecting increasing amounts of Argon into the chamber,
under pseudo static vacuum condition. The results are plotted again in Fig. 6. It is quite
evident that the outgassing rate increases linearly with the Ar pressure.  The occurrence of this
phenomenon may somewhat affect the results of the analysis, and must be accounted for, in
order to not overestimate the Helium content. It can be reduced considerably by regularly
baking the UHV chamber.

The electrochemical cell is connected to the analyzer through a storage circuit (Fig. 1),
purposely designed to allow for on line analysis of the evolving gases.  The whole circuit has
been built up using UHV components. Care is taken in order to prevent any possible helium
contamination.  Before starting an experimental run, both the cell and the circuit are first
evacuated and tested against leaks, then purged and finally buffered with high purity N70
Nitrogen (99.99999%). The cell is then filled with the electrolyte taking all precautions in
order to avoid air contamination. Furthermore, the cell is enclosed inside an UHV
containment vessel, which is subjected to the same initial testing and purging procedure and is
finally filled with N70 nitrogen at about 1050 mbar to prevent helium permeation from the
surroundings. Buffering of the cell and of the sampling circuit has been found to be necessary
to prevent boil off of the liquid electrolyte during the experiment. Due to the ≈10 ppbV
content of 4He in the high purity nitrogen, the background in the analyzer is set to about 1012
atoms. A sample of the N70 nitrogen buffer, however, is analyzed at the end of the
preliminary purging procedure (just before starting the electrolysis) to set the zero of each
experimental run. All operations, from initial purging to sample drawing and analysis, are
carried out with an automatic sequence, in order to ensure a perfect reproducibility of the
whole process. Relevant parameters are logged on a PC.

The gases evolving during the experiment are collected in the storage volume, which is held
at a constant pressure (1050 ± 2 mbar). A 6.29% aliquot of this gas (sample volume of Fig. 1)
is periodically sent to the NEG pump and then to the QMA to be analysed. This procedure
provides a precise measurement of the number of 4He atoms contained in the gas mixture.
Since equal quantities of gas are extracted at each sampling, it is very easy to compare, time
by time, the results of the analysis. The increment of the number of 4He atoms divided by the
time elapsed between two successive analysis give us an estimate of the Helium yield, and
hence of the excess power. The particular procedure adopted in the present configuration
eliminates the need to refill the system with pure N2 after a sample has been extracted, thereby
also eliminating any perturbation of the electrolytic experiment as well as any alteration of the
gas mixture composition.


3) RESULTS

Out of many measurements, we report here the preliminary results obtained in the last
experimental campaign. Results of the previous campaign have been analysed and are in good
qualitative agreement with the results reported here.

The sequence of the different steps in a typical experiment is given in Figs. 7,8 and 9.

1) Preloading phase. A feeble electrolytic current, about 5 mA, is made flow though the cell.
In a time of about one hour, R/R0 reaches smoothly the peak value of 2 corresponding,
according to Figure 4a, to the value x=0.7 (beta phase). This state is an equilibrium phase and
it may be continued indefinitely. During this phase the output power Pout coincides with the
power Pin supplied by the electrolytic current and the number of 4He atoms is compatible with
the background value of the detector. At this moment the cold fusion phenomenon is absent
and these measurements exclude the existence of systematic errors or artefacts.

2) Loading phase. At this point we apply a voltage Vc along the cathode. This voltage is
applied by increasing proportionally the cell current to a value ranging from 10 to 40 mA
(corresponding to a current density ranging from 20 to 80 mA/cm2). When the cathode is a

Fig. 7 - R/R0 versus the stoichiometric ratio x (data from reference 6). This graph allows us to derive the value
of x from the electric resistance of the cathode.

Fig. 8 - Influence of Vcathode on the Pd loading (Preparata effect). In the pre-loading phase small values of
electrolytic current, and hence of Vcathode, are used to drive the system to the β-phase equilibrium (x = 0.7). The
resistance R/R0 increases from 1 to 2, where the loading stops. At this point Vcathode is augmented and R/R0 falls
off abruptly, signalling a further increase of x (loading phase). When x crosses 1 the system enters the super-
critical phase.

Fig 9 - a) 4He content of the gas mixture inside the storage volume, (b) excess power PHe derived from helium
yield and (c) average excess calorimetric power PC in the experiment described in the text as case 1. The data
are shown as a function of time allowing to check the coincidence. During the pre-loading and loading of the
cathode, we do not observe any anomaly. When the system is driven over the threshold x = 1, entering the super-
critical phase (see text), an increase of both Pc and PHe is observed. About 12 hours after the switch-off of the
electrolytic current both Pc and PHe are zero.

plate, such current densities are unable to increase significantly the value of x, at least in a
time of some hours. When, on the contrary, the cathode is a narrow and thin stripe, as in our
case, 
R R0
drops in a very short time (some minutes) from 2 to about 1.4, as exhibited in
Fig. 8. In order to verify that indeed we are past the maximum of Fig. 7, we switch off for a
short time the current, producing a small, temporary Deuterium unloading of the cathode,
with an observed increase of 
R R0
(rather than a decrease). The value 
R R0
=1.4 corresponds
to x ≈1 (see Fig. 7).

3) Supercritical phase. Upon crossing this threshold, “anomalies” appear in the system,
namely (Fig. 9):

i. A significant deviation of 4He from the baseline is observed from the first time interval of
40 minutes onwards. The 4He content continuously grows, as long as the system is in the
supercritical phase.

ii. The temperature of the cathode, as measured by the Peltier element, increases above the
previous equilibrium value, signalling a source of enthalpy in the cell.

The two above anomalies, within the respective typical response times (40 min. for 4He and
about 300 sec. for the Peltier system) occur simultaneously. From the amount of Helium,
under the assumption of the conversion 2D→4He+23.8 MeV, one can estimate the produced
power. We find that such power PHe  generally exceeds the power Pc trivially estimated by the
Peltier system. This point will be better elucidated further on.

4) Control phase. After some hours of cell operation, the cathode potential Vc is switched off:
both anomalies i) and ii) disappear, i.e. PHe and Pc settle back to the initial zero value. Soon
after the swith-off, the loading x drops below the threshold and PC falls to zero within the time
constant of the Peltier transducer. After 12 hours, a check of the 4He content inside the storage
volume shows that no further changes have occurred, excluding leakage or permeations.

We now describe separately three experimental cases:
Case 1 – Fig. 9. In this run Pc ≈ 19 mW and PHe ≈ 240 mW. This huge mismatch (PHe ≈12.3 Pc)
suggests that most of the heat has been missed by the Peltier element.

Case 2 – In these experiments we were not able to reach a loading higher than x=1, thus we
obtained only low values of the excess power (ranging from 5  to 10 mW). In this case PHe≈Pc,
with little or no mismatch.

Case 3 – Fig. 10. While in the supercritical phase, with a Peltier reading of Pc≈20 mW, the
cathode suddenly melted. The electric parameters (current and voltage) measured during this
run did not account for an electrical cause of the melting; furthermore, as seen in Fig. 10, the
extended damage in many separated subsections makes unlikely the hypothesis of a melting
due to Joule effect. The melting occurred where the potential Vc was most negative and then,
according to the Preparata effect (see the Appendix A), the cathode most highly loaded. The
molten section accounted for the 5% of the total volume. The accident of the “molten”
cathode provides evidence that at high temperature the bulk of the excess energy escapes the
thermal calorimeter as has been suggested above.

Fig. 10 - Picture of a cathode molten during an experimental run. The electric parameters (current and voltage)
measured during this run did not account for an electrical cause of the melting; furthermore the extended
damage in many separated subsections makes unlikely the hypothesis of a melting due to Joule effect.

The measurement of PHe is by far a more reliable measurement of the power produced in the
supercritical phase, while the Peltier element is providing only a qualitative indication of the
excess enthalpy, as discussed in the Appendix A. Case 3 proves that huge temperatures have
been produced somewhere in the stripe, the melting point of Pd being as much as 1828 K. At
such temperatures, the dominant channel of heat dissipation is Stefan-Boltzmann radiation,
which is obviously only poorly recorded by the simple Peltier device. The melting interests
about 5% of the stripe, for which the radiated power will be as much as 3.15 W! This
description is further confirmed by the other measurements. In Case 2 — at very low power
(10 mW) as measured by the Helium yield and therefore at small peak temperatures — there
is good agreement PHe ≈ Pc while, in Case 1, at a higher power (240 mW) and hence at much
higher peak temperatures, the discrepancy is apparent.

Therefore this mismatch is increasing with the produced power level and it is well understood
by the non equilibrium thermal conditions in the immediate vicinity of the stripe and the
consequent leakage of a major fraction of the produced heat by radiation.

The huge difference in cold fusion yields in these three cases, suggests that it is a rapidly
varying function of x above the threshold.

A definitive check of this phenomenology will be performed in the near future by observing
directly the radiation emitted by the supercritical stripe, for instance with help of an Infrared
(IR) camera.


4) CONCLUSIONS

The experiments performed so far suggest the following conclusions:

i) The Preparata effect has been experimentally validated beyond any doubt: in every
experiment we have been able to produce the results illustrated in Fig. 8. These results
provide simultaneously a) evidence that deuterons are in a coherent state (see Appendix A), b)
a very effective method of loading one-dimensional cathodes.

ii) The reported production of excess heat and Helium occur above a critical threshold of D
concentration in Pd. The observed threshold is compatible with the value x = 1 predicted by
the theory (see Appendix A) [3,8].

iii)The presence of 4He provides evidence that a nuclear process occurred in the cell; a
nuclear reaction has been obtained with purely chemical procedures.

PHe observed in Case 1 is compatible with the values of excess heat reported by Fleischmann
[9] and by Preparata [10], with a highly reliable "isoperibolic" calorimetry.

In the next stage of the experiments we will try to improve the thermal calorimetry with the
help of an IR camera, capable to detect the local temperature of the hot spots of the cathode.

Furthermore we will search for possible new nuclear species produced by the very high
frequency EM field associated to coherent nuclear processes subsequent to the 2D → 4He
transmutation. There is preliminary indication [11] that Ni nuclei may be present in cathodes,
subsequently to cold fusion.


REFERENCES

M. Fleischmann, S.J. Pons, J. of Electroanal. Chem. 261, 301 (1989).
“Farewell (not fond) to cold fusion”, Editorial of Nature 344, 365 (1990).

T. Bressani, E. Del Giudice, G. Preparata, Nuovo Cimento 101A, 845 (1989).

G. Preparata, unpublished, see also Ref. 19.

R. Felici et al. Rev. Sci. Inst. 66(5), 3344 (1995).

A. De Ninno, A. La Barbera, V. Violante, Phys. Rev. B56, 2417 (1997).

G. Bambakidis et al., Phys. Rev. 177,1044 (1969).

G. Preparata, QED Coherence in Matter, (World Scientific Singapore, 1995), see in
particular ch. 8
M. Fleischmann et al., J. of Electroanal. Chem. 287, 293 (1990).


10. G. Preparata M. Scorletti, M. Verpelli, J. of Electroanal. Chem. 411, 9 (1996).

11. X.Z. Li et al.  Proceedings of 8th International Conference on Cold Fusion, ICCF-8,

Lerici 2000, edited by F. Scaramuzzi (SIF Bologna 2000), Vol. 70, p. 123.


12. G. Alefeld and J. Volkl, Hydrogen In Metals, Vol. I, II (Springer-Verlag 1978).

13. A. Cöhn, Z. Elektrochem. 35, 676 (1929).

14. M. Fleischmann, S. Pons, G. Preparata, Nuovo Cimento 105A, 763 (1992).

15. B. Dandapani, M. Fleischmann, J. of Electroanal. Chem. 39, 323 (1972).

16. R. Wisniewski, J. Rostocki, Phys. Rev. B3(2), 251 (1971).

17. A. Sievert, W. Danz: Z. Physik. Chem. B38, 61 (1937).

18. J.B. Huizenga, Cold Fusion: The Scientific Fiasco Of The Century, (Oxford University

Press 1993).


19. M. Cola, E. Del Giudice, A. De Ninno, G. Preparata, Proceedings of 8th

International Conference on Cold Fusion (ICCF-8), Lerici 2000, edited by F.

Scaramuzzi (SIF Bologna 2000), Vol. 70, p. 349.


20. Y. Aharonov, D. Böhm, Phys. Rev. 11, 485 (1959).

21. G. Preparata Proceedings of 5th International Conference on Cold Fusion (ICCF-5),

Montecarlo - Monaco 1995, p. 265.

Edito dall'
Unità Comunicazione e Informazione
Lungotevere Grande Ammiraglio Thaon di Revel, 76 - 00196 Roma
Stampa: Centro Stampa Tecnografico - C. R. Frascati 
www.enea.it
Finito di stampare nel mese di Novembre 2002
