1. Introduction

Observation of a heat excess [1] and neutron emission [2] in the first heavy-water electrolysis experiments
in 1989 seemed to be in contradiction to laws of nuclear physics. A simple calculation of the penetration factor
through the Coulomb barrier at room temperature [3] gave reaction rates for the d+d fusion reactions being a
factor of 1050 smaller than the rates needed for explanation the experimental results. On the other hand, the
observed neutron emission should be about a factor of 107
 weaker than a reaction channel responsible for the
heat production and clearly correlated to the fusion of the 4He nucleus [4]. Thus, the reaction branching ratios at
room temperature completely contradict the experimental results obtained by means of the accelerator technique
at deuteron energies of a few keV for which the mirror stripping reactions 2H(d,p)3H and 2H(d,n)3He, being
equally probable, dominate by a factor >106
 the electromagnetic transition 2H(d,γ)
4He. Reproducibility of the
cold fusion experiments has been highly increased in the last decade [5,6] and some important experimental
conditions, under which the heat production takes place, has been found [7,8]. Nevertheless, a lack of reliable
nuclear theory explaining at least some of the room temperature effects leads to an ongoing scepticism in the
scientific community. Therefore, finding of the enhanced electron screening effect in metallic targets for the d+d
stripping reactions [9], and similar observations of other groups [10-13] can play a key role in understanding of
the cold fusion phenomenon. Screening of charges of the reacting nuclei by surrounding electrons in metallic
environments increases the Coulomb barrier penetrability and results in an exponential-like enhancement of the
cross sections compared to those measured for a gas target. That effect cannot explain, however, the change of
branching ratios for the d+d reaction at room temperature and domination of the 4He reaction channel. A simple
mechanism of a single particle resonance located very close to the D+D reaction threshold in the compound
nucleus 4He will be presented here. Combination of the electron screening effect and the resonant process can
explain most of the observed phenomena usually connected to the cold fusion and the heat excess production in
heavy-water electrolysis experiments.


2. Enhanced electron screening effect

Electron screening effect can be described by a screening length a that corresponds to a distance from which
the nuclear charges (ions) embedded in an electron gas can be treated as neutral. For strongly coupled plasmas
where the average Coulomb potential energy between ions is larger than their kinetic energy, the screening
length does not depend on the temperature and is of order of the Wigner-Seitz radius 

where Z and ne
 are the ion charge and the density of free electrons, respectively. Dense astrophysical plasmas of
White and Brown Dwarfs or of Giant Planets [14] are very good examples for strongly coupled plasmas.

Similarly, deuterons moving in metallic environments can also be considered using plasma physics
methods. For the simple Bohr screening, the screened Coulomb potential energy between two reacting deuterons
can be presented as follows 

Now the screening length a is of order of the Bohr radius. For projectile energies used in accelerator experiments 
where r << a, the deuteron-deuteron potential can be simply described as the Coulomb potential reduced by a 
constant, the screening energy Ue = e2/a. Thus, the “screened” cross section dependent on the penetration factor 
through the Coulomb barrier P corrected for the electron screening, can be expressed by the only weakly on 
energy dependent astrophysical S-factor 

Here Ecm denotes the energy in the center of mass system and EG is the Gamow energy defined as follows: 

where Z1 and Z2 are the charges of reacting nuclei and µ stays for the reduced mass. The screening energy Ue 
corresponds to a reduction of the Coulomb barrier height in the expression for the penetration factor. In 
comparison to the bare nuclei, the cross section for reactions in metallic environments exponentially increases 
for decreasing projectile energies, whereby Ue can be taken from fits to the experimental data. The Ue values 
determined in our experiments for C, Al, Zr, Pd and Ta targets are depicted in Fig. 1. For heavier metals the 
screening energy amounts to about 300 eV that is one order of magnitude larger than the value 25±5 eV obtained 
in the gas target experiment [15]. 

Fig. 1. - Experimental and theoretical electron screening energies obtained for C, Al, Zr, Pd and Ta targets. 

The screening effect in metals can be described within the self-consistent dielectric function theory [9]. 
It enables to treat the electron screening as a static polarization of the metallic medium induced by the positively 
charged deuterons. The screened Coulomb potential V(r) is a solution of the Poisson equation and can be 
expressed as a Fourier transform 

The wave-number dependent dielectric functions 
vε  and 
c
ε  describe polarization of valence and core electrons 
of host atoms induced by a charged impurity. Φ(r) and ϕ i(q) functions are the screening function and electronic 
charge-form factors of reacting nuclei, respectively (for details see [9,18]). Additionally, the cohesion screening 
contribution arising from the difference in binding energies between two reacting deuterons and the compound 
nucleus 4He in the crystal lattice has to be included [9]. The theoretical calculations describe the observed 
material dependence of the screening energy qualitatively correctly (see Fig. 1). The main contribution to the 
theoretical values is provided by polarization of the free valence electrons, although the contribution of bound 
electrons (core polarization) and the cohesion screening cannot be neglected. However, the absolute values of the 
theoretically calculated Ue fail by a factor of about two. No reason for such a large discrepancy between 
theoretical and experimental values has been found so far. Recent experiments carried out under ultra high 
vacuum conditions [16,17] show that this discrepancy can be even larger. On the other hand, since the 
experimental screening energies obtained for insulating materials are rather small (<50eV) [12,13] we can 
conclude that the large screening energies should result from conduction electrons. 

An independent test of the enhanced screening effect can be obtained by study alpha radioactive decays 
in different insulating and metallic environments. Higher screening energies for metallic environments result in a 
slight decrease of life times of alpha decays [17,20]. 


3. Nuclear reactions at room temperature 

Since the astrophysical S-factors for fusion reactions are usually known down to lowest projectile energies 
the only uncertainty of nuclear reaction rates at room temperature results from the screening energy Ue. 
However, the screening energy as defined in Eq.(2) loses its physical sense for the closest approach distances 
comparable with the screening length a. That corresponds to projectile energies comparable or smaller than the 
value e2/a . Thus, in order to apply Eq.(3) for calculation of the reaction cross section at room temperature, we 
have to replace Ue by an energy-dependent effective screening energy Ueff . Similar to Ue, the effective screening 
energy can be still interpreted as an appropriate reduction of the bare Coulomb barrier which should match to the 
penetration through the screened Coulomb potential. Therefore, Ueff has to be calculated from a condition setting 
equal the penetration factors as applied in Eq.(2) and that obtained within the WKB approximation with the 
screened potential V(r): 

Here R1 and R2 are the classical turning points in the WKB expression, and M is the deuteron mass. The results 
of calculations for Pd are presented in Fig.2. There are two well defined limits: at the high energy (Ecm>1 keV) 
and at the low energy (Ecm<10 eV). The ratio between the low-energy and the high-energy Ueff value amounts to 
about 0.58, being nearly independent of the actual deuteron-deuteron potential. Additionally, the cohesion 
screening energy has to be added leading to the total screening energy at the zero projectile energy U0 that is 
equal to about 0.78 of the high-energy limit Ue [9]. 

At deuteron energies below 10 eV, the effective screening energy remains almost constant, hence the 
expression for the cross section takes a very simple form. Starting from Eq.(3) we obtain 

where U0 and S0 are the screening energy and the S-factor taken at the projectile energy zero, respectively. 

Surprisingly, the cross section increases at low energies as the barrier-penetration factor stays constant and the 
wave-length dependence dominates [9]. The same expression is also valid for other nuclear reactions at room 
temperature. Taking into account that the Ue for the deuteron stripping reaction 2H(d,p)3H amounts to about 500 
eV [17] (U0=360eV), the reaction cross section at room temperature reaches value σscr=10-15 b which is 
comparable with the cross sections for nuclear transitions induced by the weak interactions. It means that the 
fusion reaction at room temperature should be measurable by use a suitable experimental set-up. 

For the electrolysis experiments, a very useful quantity that can experimentally be determined is the nuclear 
reaction rate defined here without number densities of involved nuclei as follows 

Here vrel is the relative velocity between the reacting nuclei and µ denotes the reduced mass. Due to the energy 
dependence of the cross section at very low energies (see Eq.(6)), the reaction rate depends only on U0 and not 
on Ecm. Therefore, no assumption about the distribution of the deuteron velocity at room temperature is 
necessary. 

Nuclear reaction rates at room temperature very strongly depend on both the Gamow and screening 
energies. In order to illustrate it we compare the nuclear reaction rates of three fusion reactions between 
hydrogen isotopes for which the screening energy should be the same: 2H(d,p)3H, 2H(p,γ)3He and 3H(p,γ)4He. 

Without any electron screening contribution, the first reaction induced by nuclear forces ought to be much more 
probable than the others mediated by electromagnetic interaction, which is confirmed by large differences 
between the values of the astrophysical S-factors (see Table 1). However, as it was argued in the work of Koonin 
and Nauerberg [3], the small reduced masses in the channels p+d and p+t result in small Gamow energies, which 
consequently leads to an increase of reaction rates at very small projectile energies (see Fig. 2). Correspondingly, 
for small screening energies below 200 eV, the 2H(p,γ)3He reaction is the most probable reaction at room 
temperature. However, if the screening energies would be higher the 2H(d,p)3H reaction dominates. Its reaction 
rate will be for U0=360 eV by a factor of about 103 larger than the values for the other reactions. On the other 
hand, this relatively large screening energy can provide the neutron production rate in the 2H(d,n)3He reaction of 
about 10-15 neutrons per deuteron pair and second. This is above the neutron production rate estimated in the 
experiment of Jones et al. [2] but significantly below the nuclear reaction rates necessary for explanation of the 
heat excess observed in the experiment of Fleischmann and Pones [1]. 


4. D-D threshold resonance  

The observation of the excess heat production is probably connected to the fusion of 4He [4] with the rate by 
about a factor of 107 larger than the neutron emission. Thus, beside the screening effect an additional 
phenomenon changing the branching ratios and increasing the reaction rates at room temperature should 
obviously exist. Alteration of the branching ratio by a factor of 107 might be achieved within the classical 
nuclear physics without any exceptional mechanisms. An example for such an approach could be a narrow 
resonance in the 4He nucleus lying close to the d+d reaction threshold. Supposing a nearly single-particle width 
of this resonance for the deuteron channel and simultaneous quenching of the nucleon decay channels, one can 
explain major experimental results concerning the cold fusion. The deuteron width of the resonance can be 
expressed by the R-Matrix formula 

Table 1. Astrophysical S-factors, Gamow energies and reduced masses for three different fusion reactions between hydrogen 
isotopes. 

Fig. 2. - Nuclear reaction rates for three different fusion reactions in dependence of the electron screening energy U0 
(presented in log scale). 

where Pd ,  µ and  ad are the penetration factor, the reduced mass and the channel radius for the d+d channel, 
respectively, and 
θd
 denotes the dimensionless reduced resonance width. Since the total resonance width Γ is 
assumed to be dominated by the deuteron width (Γ≈ Γd), its value will drop for low sub-Coulomb deuteron 
energies very rapidly with decreasing penetration factor. On the other hand, the resonance strength, observed for 
instance for the proton decay channel, is given by the ratio ΓdΓp/Γ and should be independent of the resonance 
energy if we take into account that the proton width Γp remains nearly constant. Thus, the height of the single 
particle resonance (∼ ΓdΓp/Γ2 ≈ 1/Γd) strongly increases as the resonance energy decreases – we speak about so-
called narrowing of the single particle resonance. For the resonance energy of about 10 eV, the resonance width 
would be of a few eV and its height would raise by a factor larger than 106. Furthermore, the hypothetical 
resonance could change the reaction branching ratios within the resonance width in favour of those supposed for 
the cold fusion. The 0+ assessment of spin and parity of this resonance makes forbidden its gamma decay to the 
ground state being also 0+ in agreement with heavy-water electrolysis experiments where no gamma emission 
has been observed. Due to the single particle nature of this resonance, the neutron and proton decay channels 
should be negligible compared to the d+d partial width. Therefore, the decay of the resonance can only take 
place by non-radiative electromagnetic channels as the internal pair creation, the electron conversion or in the 
process we call the deuteron conversion where the energy excess of the compound nucleus 4He of about 24 MeV 
will be transferred to a neighbouring deuteron. Decay probabilities of non-radiative channels leading to a direct 
fusion of 4He in metallic environments will be discuss in a separated paper [19]. 

The small width of the supposed resonance would also explain the problems connected to the 
reproducibility of cold fusion experiments. Small local changes of the lattice structure can vary the resonance 
energy by e few eV due to alteration of the screening energy as already determined for alpha decays [17]. Thus, 
dependently on local crystal defects, the deuteron density and other target material parameters that are not 
usually controlled in the experiments, the 4He fusion cross section can be resonant or not and consequently we 
could observe an enhanced production of helium by many orders of magnitude only at special material 
conditions. 


5. Conclusions 

We have shown that the electron screening effect plays a crucial role for room temperature nuclear 
reactions. The enhancement factor of the nuclear reactions due to electron screening is material dependent and 
reaches at room temperature for heavy metals a factor of about 1040 compared to the cross sections calculated for 
the gaseous deuterium [3]. The electron screening effect makes possible to observe experimentally also other 
reactions between hydrogen isotopes using an appreciate set-up (see Table 1). Contradictory to previous 
calculations, the 2H(d,n)3He and 2H(d,p)3H reactions should still have the largest cross sections at room 
temperature. The corresponding reaction rates are in agreement with small amounts of 3H and 3He found in the 
heavy-water electrolysis experiments. 

Domination of the 4He channel by a factor of about 107 over other open channels in experiments where a 
heat excess has been measured can be explained by a 0+ single particle resonance placed in the compound 
nucleus very close to the reaction threshold. De-excitation of this resonance state should only take place by non-
radiative electromagnetic channels that are very difficult to detect experimentally. Furthermore, an interplay 
between the electron screening effect that strength depends on local crystal structure of the target material and 
the resonance reaction mechanisms is able to clarify difficulties with regard to a bad reproducibility of the cold 
fusion experiments. Crystal defects or changes of local deuteron density can shift the resonance energy even by a 
few eV resulting in the non-resonant reaction mechanism and suppression of the 4He fusion channel. Thus, 
controlling of the microscopic structure of target materials in future cold fusion experiments ought to be very 
important. 

On the other hand, a material enabling large fusion rates at room temperature should also ensure a high 
deuteron density and a relatively low deuteron binding energy in the lattice. The latter condition is necessary in 
order to reach large deuteron mobility, which further increases the reaction probability by many orders of 
magnitude. Therefore, Pd still seems to be an ideal material for study nuclear reactions at room temperature. 


References 

[1]. M. Fleischmann, S. Pons and M. Hawkins, J. Electroanal. Chem. 261 (1989) 301 
[2]. S.E. Jones et al., Nature 338 (1989) 737 
[3]. S.E. Koonin and M. Nauenberg, Nature 339 (1989) 690 
[4]. A. De Ninno et al., Proceedings of the ICCF-10, Massachusetts 2003, Cambridge 
[5]. S. Szpak and P.A. Mosier-Boss (ed.), Technical Report 1862, Office of Naval Research, San Diego, 
California, 2002 
[6]. M.C.H. McKubre, Proceedings of the ICCF-10, Massachusetts 2003, Cambridge 
[7]. M.C.H. McKubre and F.L. Tanzella, Proceedings of the ICCF-7, Vancouver, Canada, 1998 
[8]. K. Czerski, A. Huke, A. Biller, P. Heide, M. Hoeft and G. Ruprecht, Europhys. Lett. 54 (2001) 449; 
Proceedings of the International Conference on Nuclear Asrophysics “Nuclei in the Cosmos”, July 6-11, 
1998 Volos, Greece, edited by N. Prantzos and S. Harissopulos (Editions Frontières), p. 152 
[9]. K. Czerski, A. Huke, P. Heide, G. Ruprecht, Europhys. Lett. (2004) 
[10]. H. Yuki et al. JETP Lett. 68 (1988) 823 
[11]. J. Kasagi et al., J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 71 (2002) 2281 
[12]. F. Raiola et al., Eur. Phys. J. A 13 (2002) 377 
[13]. F. Raiola et al., Eur. Phys. J. A 547 (2004) 193 
[14]. S. Ichimaru, Rev. Mod. Phys. 65 (1993) 252 
[15]. U. Greife et al., Z. Phys. A 351 (1995) 107 
[16]. K. Czerski, A. Huke, L Martin, N. Targosz, D. Blauth, A. Górska, P. Heide, H. Winter, J. Phys. G, 35 (2008)  014012 
[17]. K. Czerski, P. Heide, A. Huke, A.I. Kilic, I. Kulesza, N. Targosz-Ślęczka, Acta Physica Pol. B 40 (2009) 903 
[18]. A. Huke et al., Phys. Rev. C 78 (2008) 015803 
[19]. K. Czerski K. et al., to be published 
[20]. H.B. Jeppesen et al., Eur. Phys. J. A32 (2007) 31 
