ABSTRACT

In a gas-loading D/Pd or H/Pd system, the nuclear products have been identified using
mass spectroscopy, scanning electron microscope, electron probe microanalysis, and solid
state nuclear track detector. In contrast with the electrolytic cell in most of the "cold fusion"
experiments, gas-loading system has the advantage of less contamination, and provides one
more compelling evidence.


1. Introduction

9 years after the first announcement of Fleischmann and Pons experiment, cold fusion
community has confirmed a single fact: that is "excess heat" with no strong neutron and
Gamma radiation. Two different conclusions were extracted from this single fact: (1) "excess
heat" is a mistake because most of physicists believe that "excess heat" has to have strong
neutron and Gamma radiation; (2) "excess heat" is a real phenomenon , because the
experimentalists persist that their instruments and observation are reliable, although they do
not understand the mechanism of this phenomenon.

The key issue to reconcile these two different conclusions is to find any nuclear products
other than neutron or Gamma radiation. The low energy nuclear transmutation is an important
object for this purpose

The nuclear transmutations in the "cold fusion" experiments have been reported in gasdischarge
and electrolytic systems, but it was not paid enough attention until a series of
quantified measurements were presented in the Second International Low Energy Nuclear
Reactions Conference and ICCF-6 in 1996. In order to confirm these low energy nuclear
transmutations , the exclusion of any possible
contamination was essential. Our gas loading
experiment has the advantage of less
contamination; therefore, various technologies
were applied to our gas loading D/Pd and
H/Pd systems to identify any possible nuclear
products.


2. Helium in the Gas-loading D/Pd System.

Among the possible nuclear products,
helium is the first object based on the D+D
reaction. Miles and Arata showed that there
were helium generated in the heavy water
electrolytic system when the "excess heat"
was generated . Hence, the gas in our gasloading
D/Pd system was analysed using mass
spectroscopy (NG-1000).

In order to distinguish the helium from
the D2 gas(m(4He)=4.00260, m(D2)=4.02820)
, high resolution mass spectroscopy was applied. The resolution, (m/Lim), has to be greater than 156; however, the resolution of the
mass spectroscopy in our experiment(NG-1000) is greater than 700. 

The gas-loading system has been described in details in the proceedings ofICCF-6 [l]. To
avoid the contamination from the air, we detect the ratio of 4He to 2°Ne of the sample gas in
the dewar in parallel with the air sample. Fig.2 shows the signal diagram in this experiment.
We took the sample gas from the gas-loading D/Pd dewar, where the "excess heat"
experiment were done for more than one year. The ratio of 4He/2°Ne in this sample gas was
0.55. This ratio for the air sample was measured just before and after the sample test. This :
ratio of 4He/2°Ne for the standard air should 
be 0.318, and this ratio for our air samples 
are 0.296, 0.299, respectively. Thus, the 
accuracy is good enough to show there is a 
"helium" source in the deuterium gas-loading 
dewar . We analyse the helium components 
in the original deuterium gas also. The 
absolute value of helium component is very 
low; however , the ratio of 4He/2°Ne=0.318 
is very close to that of standard air. This 
confirms the conclusion that the "helium" 
source is associated with deuterium plus 
palladium system. 


3. Nuclear Products in the Hydrogen­

loaded Palladium
In our gas-loading system, the H/Pd 
system was used as a control for "excess 
heat" measurement. Now it turns out to be a 
Ne-20 
r,_ 
I· 
He-4 
J: 
 T 
 Jb 
D 
Ne-20 
l. 
l J, 
Air 
Ne-20 
Ne-20 
.  .,·; 
He-4 r 
D+Pd 
Air 
good 
system 
to 
detect 
the 
nuclear Fig.2 Mass-spectroscopy measurement of the 
transmutation as well. After one year of 
ratio of Helium-4 to Neon-20 for pure 
loading experiment, Zinc was found on the 
deuterium gas, air sample before test, gas 
surface of hydrogen-loaded palladium wire 
sample from D/Pd dewar, and air sample 
after test . 
(Fig.3) [2]. In order to exclude the 
possibility of contamination , we searched the rare-earth elements among the other nuclear 
products. Terbium(65Tb) on the surface of the hydrogen-loaded palladium was found (Fig.4 
and Fig.5) [3] . Now we report the nuclear signal emitted by hydrogen-loaded palladium thin 
film. 

The solid state nuclear track detector (CR-39) was used to detect any energetic charged 
particle from the surface of palladium thin film. Fig.6 shows that a piece of hydrogen-loaded 
palladium thin film was sandwiched in between two pieces of CR-39 detector. 5½ months 
later, CR-39 was etched in 6.8N NaOH solution at 70 °C for 5 hours , under the microscopy 
the etch pits were clearly shown. There is a big difference between the area covered by 
hydrogen loaded palladium film and the area not covered by hydrogen loaded palladium film. 

The number density of the pits is 30 times greater than that of background. 

An interesting signal was found in a pair of CR-39 numbered lAl 78 and 1Al48. The 
signals appeared in the same position with the similar pattern. It reveals that there might be an 
active region on the palladium thin film, which emitted energetic charged particles in both 
directions. Since the thickness of the thin film is about 1 micron, it gives an estimation of the 
energy of the charged particle also, which must be in the order ofMeV. 

ICCF-7 


4. Discussion

Zn components appeared in the Pd electrode in the early literature on cold fusion research
also. It was considered as a contamination. Indeed this was one of the important evidences for 
nuclear signal. However, it means that "cold fusion" is just a part of this new category of 
anomalous phenomena in D/Pd, H/Pd or Hydrogen/Metal system. "Cold fission" might be 
another part of this anomalous phenomena. The three body (3D) nuclear reaction[4] is also a 
part of this anomalous phenomena. However, they might be all predicted by the selective 
resonant tunneling model. [ 5]. 


References
 
[l] X.Z.Li, et al., " 'Excess Heat' Measurement in Gas-loading D/Pd System," Journal of New
Energy, vol. I, no.4, Fall 1996, p.34; see also in " Progress in New Hydrogen Energy,"
Proceedings of International Conference on Cold Fusion, Vol.2, edited by M.Okamoto,
October 13-18,1996, Japan, (Published by New Energy and Technology Development
Organization, and Institute of Applied Energy) p.455.
[2] G.S.Qiao, 
X.Z.Li, et al., "Nuclear Transmutation in a Gas-Loading H/Pd System,"
Journal of New Energy, vol.2, no.2, Summer, 1997, p.48.
(3] X.Z.Li, G.S.Qiao, et al., "Selective Resonant Tunneling and Nuclear Transmutation in a 
Gas-Loading H/Pd System," The Proceedings of the 5-th Russian Conference on Cold 
Fusion and Nuclear Transmutation," Sochi, Sept. 28-Oct.4, 1997. 
[4] A.Takahashi, et al., "Detection of Three-body Deuteron Fusion in Titanium-Deuteride
under the Stimulation by Deuteron Beam," preprint (1998, March 6)
[5] X.Z.Li, "The 3-Dimensional Resonance Tunneling in Chemically Assisted Nuclear Fission
and Fusion Reactions," The Proceedings ofICCF-5, Dec. 6-9, 1993, Lahaina, USA, Vol.4,
2-1 (1994), EPRI TR-104188-V4.
i 
1000·-1 
Ii i:lt 
'I 
; i 
(a) 
eoo--j
. ---·- --1 
(b) ! 
Fig.3 (a) EDS analysis of the original palladium wire, 
(b) EDS analysis of the hydrogen-loaded palladium wire.
·----··-----
Energy (keV) 
Fig.4 EDS analysis of hydrogen-loaded Pd wire showing Tb peak 
20 un 
Tb 
15 lV 40 nA 
ICCF-7 
Y A N C O V Y a R 
"1k e-,,r 
Fig. 5 Electron probe micro-analysis (EPMA) in WDX (Wave-length Disperse X-ray) mode 
showing Terbium distribution on the surface of palladium wire loaded with hydrogen in 
a gas-loading system 
ICCF-7 
1A178 
1A148 
:  -... · :._ 
·: _:·· ..
' ·, 
.-: .. • 
·· .... / 
Fig.6 The nuclear signal in the solid state nuclear track detector(CR-39) 
