1. Introduction

A Lattice Energy Converter (LEC) is a direct energy conversion device that converts the thermal energy of lattice
vibration into ionizing radiation and electrical energy. The direct conversion of heat into electricity without the use
of radioactive materials or mechanical means is a challenging yet promising method for the production of electrical
energy. Figure 1 shows a Pd-H LEC cell that self-initiates and self-sustains the spontaneous production of a voltage
and current into a load impedance. In its simplest implementation a LEC achieves direct conversion using a pair
of electrodes separated by a gas at normal temperature and pressure (NTP). One electrode, designated the working
electrode (WE), is comprised in part of a hydrogen host material, such as iron (Fe), nickel (Ni), or palladium (Pd),
occluded with hydrogen or deuterium gas. The other electrode, designated the counter electrode (CE), may be a
common metal, such as copper (Cu), zinc (Zn), or brass an alloy of Cu and Zn.

Figure 1. Self-initiating and self-sustaining Pd-H LEC cell under load.

Experiments have established that when hydrogen host material is electrodeposited from an aqueous solution
the WE will become ‘active’ and produce ionizing radiation. WE activity can be veriﬁed in air by placing the
WE in close proximity to a CE and connecting a digital voltmeter (DVM) between the two electrodes.
If no
spontaneous voltage is observed the WE is returned to the plating bath and more hydrogen host material is code-
posited on the WE. Multiple LEC conﬁgurations have been tested including tests where an external electrical
voltage was applied between the working electrode and the counter electrode as well as tests where the LEC self-
initiates and self-sustains the production of a voltage and current in the absence of an applied external voltage and
current.


2. Background

2.1. Hydrogen-Metal interactions:
The metal-hydrogen system [1] and in particular the palladium-hydrogen system [2], [3] have been studied for more
than 150 years since H. Sainte-Claire Deville and E Troost [4] reported that hydrogen diffused rapidly through homo-
geneous plates of fused iron (Fe) and platinum (Pt). These surprising results led Thomas Graham, Master of the Royal
Mint, to conduct a similar series of experiments with palladium (Pd). Three years later, Graham [5] was the ﬁrst to re-
port the high rate at which hydrogen would diffuse through heated Pd. Additionally, Graham found that Pd could absorb
over 600 times its volume of hydrogen. More recently, the diffusion of hydrogen in the palladium-hydrogen (Pd-H)
system as well as the nickel-hydrogen (Ni-H) and iron-hydrogen (Fe-H) systems has been documented by Mehrer [6].
Fukai [1], when discussing the role that lattice vacancies and in particular superabundant vacancies (SAVs) have in
determining the properties of materials, points out:

F.E. Gordon and H.J. Whitehouse / Journal of Condensed Matter Nuclear Science 35 (2022) 30–48
The real equilibrium phase diagrams including M-atoms vacancies have not been obtained so far. This recog-
nition brought us to the expectation that SAVs should be formed in the process of electrodeposition of metals
from aqueous solutions. There M and H atoms are deposited simultaneously, and in this process appropriate
numbers of vacancies can be incorporated.

Experimentally, WE’s have been produced by the electrodeposition of hydrogen host material from an aqueous PdCl2
and LiCl solution as well as by the co-deposition of Pd from an aqueous solution of PdBr2 without LiBr, which was
used by J. P. Biberian [7] to produce an active WE and replicate the LEC results. WE’s have also been produced by
codeposition of iron from an aqueous solution of FeCl2 4H2O, and other materials or alloys are expected to produce
active WE’s.

2.2. Electrical properties of gases:
Similarly, the electrical properties of gases have been studied for more than 130 years. In 1896, J.J. Thomson and E
Rutherford [8] published an important paper ‘On the Passage of Electricity through Gases exposed to Röntgen (X-)
Rays.’ In the same year, Thomson [9] gave a series of lectures on The Discharge of Electricity through Gases at
Princeton University in New Jersey. This was followed in 1899 [10] by his deﬁnitive paper ‘On the theory of the
conduction of electricity through gases by charged ions’ where he developed a mathematical theory that would predict
the ionization rate per unit volume of gas from a measurement of the current density per unit area of the conduction
path. In 1903 he published the 1st edition of his treatise Conduction of Electricity Through Gases [11]. In 1906 he
published the 2nd edition [12] of his treatise, the same year he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics
in recognition of the great merits of his theoretical and experimental investigations on the conduction of
electricity by gases,
This was then followed in 1928 [13] and 1933 [14] by the expanded two volume 3rd edition coauthored with his son
G.P. Thomson, soon to be Nobel Laureate (1937).

The theory of the conduction of electricity through gases can be used to analyze the performance of a LEC with the
objective of both understanding the phenomenon and of optimizing its performance in order to realize implementations
of practical application. Toward this goal the following works by J.S.E Townsend [15], K.K Darrow [16], and L.B.
Loeb [17], are of particular interest. Townsend was a research assistant to J.J. Thomson and although he is remembered
for his work on gas discharges, i.e., the Townsend avalanche discharge, his discussion in his book [15] of ‘The Motion
of Ions in Gases’ is instructive. Darrow was a Research Physicist at Bell Laboratories in New Jersey and his discussion
of the diffusion of ions to the measurement of the current density per unit area in his book titled Electrical Phenomena
in Gases is of particular importance and will be discussed in detail in a following section. Loeb was a professor of
physics at the University of California at Berkeley for many years and his book titled Basic Processes of Gaseous
Electronics [18] includes advances in understanding made during WWII.

The important observation from the above references is that there are several properties of the gas that need to be
carefully considered in order to analyze the performance of a LEC: the rate of generation of the ions; the attachment
of ionized electrons to neutral molecules; the recombination rate of ions back into neutral molecules; the density of
ions in the gas; the mobility of the ions in the gas; the space charge within the gas due to the difference in the number
of positive and negative ions; the electric ﬁeld strength in the gas; the diffusion of ions due to concentration gradients
in the gas; as well as, the current density produced per unit cross-sectional area of the conduction path which is cell
geometry dependent.

Figure 2. LEC cell conﬁgured with a variable external voltage supply to measure current vs. voltage (I-V) characteristic.


3. Experimental results

3.1. Experimental setup and tests with external variable voltage supply:
Initial LEC experimentation began with the objective to conduct electrolysis in a gas in order to produce fugacity and
thus electrically load hydrogen into a palladium working electrode at temperatures above 100 ◦C. Experimental evi-
dence by multiple LENR scientists indicated that LENR output increased with increasing temperature and loading but
experiments that use liquid electrolysis and are limited to temperatures below the boiling point of the liquid electrolyte.

Figure 2 illustrates the initial test cell that was designed with the objective to greatly increase the operating tem-
perature and thus increase LENR output. This cell includes a working electrode composed of a 1/4 inch copper tube
that had been codeposited with palladium from an aqueous solution of 0.03 M PdCl2 and 0.3 molar LiCl. The working
electrode was positioned inside a 3/4 inch brass pipe which served as the counter electrode and the cell was assembled
using standard pipe ﬁttings, including a non-conducting bushing to electrically isolate the working electrode from the
counter electrode.

After assembly, a vacuum was pulled and the cell ﬁlled with deuterium gas. Since gas is a non-conductor unless
it contains ions, six 1 µCi sources of Am-241 were placed in the cell to ionize the gas during initial tests. Also
shown in Figure 2 is a high voltage DC power supply in series with a 1 MΩ current limiting resistor for personnel
and instrumentation safety. A Labjack U6 Pro with capability to record up to 14 channels of data is connected to the
working electrode (WE) and the counter electrode (CE) in order to measure the voltages to ground. A resistor voltage
divider was placed in the CE circuit in parallel with the Labjack input to limit the voltage to no larger than ± 10 volts.
Initial tests using this Pd-D LEC cell conﬁguration produced more conduction through the gas, i.e., more ions in the
gas, than what 6 µCi of Am-241 would produce if there were no Pd codeposited on the WE. When the Am-241 sources
were removed, the LEC cell still conducted a current.

A second important observation was that the LabJackTM instrumentation system with a sample rate of 512 samples
per second detected voltage spikes and short-term excursions that occurred on time scales of less than 2 ms. Figure 3
is a screen shot showing the LabJack real-time display of the LEC amplitude. The sample rate used during this test
was 128 samples per second. The vertical axis displays the Amplitude in volts and the horizontal axis displays Time in
seconds. Since the LabJack instrumentation system is limited to ± 10 volts, a scale factor is used to correct the voltage
in real-time during concurrent processing with data logging.

Figure 3. Typical real-time display of the LEC amplitude in volts with 8 seconds of data continuously scrolling across the screen.

In order for data processing to keep up with data collection, software was developed to run concurrently with
LabJack using a combination of Microsoft Excel and Visual Basic so that as soon as a ﬁle was recorded, it was
processed and displayed. At a minimum, data processing for each channel includes: scaling the data; ﬁle averages;
one second averages; and maximum and minimum voltages for each second. Additional processing has included the
use of a Ludlum proton recoil scintillation detector (PRESCILA) to detect neutrons and sodium iodide detectors to
detect gamma including energy levels, as well as signal processing of various environmental channels such as ambient
test stand temperature, LabJack laboratory temperature, and the high-voltage power supply voltage. Typically, up to
four LEC cells are simultaneously recorded and processed along with temperatures with the 14 channels available.

Multiple tests have been conducted to characterize the LEC performance such as changing the polarity of exter-
nal voltage applied, changes in cell temperature and gas pressure, changes in cell dimensions, and changes in load
resistance. LEC cells have also been tested using deuterium gas, hydrogen gas, and even atmospheric air which has
approximately 0.5 parts per million of hydrogen. When exposed to air, the activity decayed over several hours which
suggests that the activity was in part the result of outgassing of the hydrogen, but some activity was observed even
after several days.

One example is shown in Figure 4 where the temperature in the cell was reduced to approximately minus 55 ◦C
to reduce the number of water vapor ion clusters in the gas [19] and thereby eliminate them as the source of ions
contributing to cell conduction. For this test, after the cell temperature had stabilized, the voltage was reduced in
steps of 100 volts from a high of 800 volts down to 100 volts where the step size was reduced to 10 volts. Although
the high-voltage supply was initially at 800 volts, the voltage across the LEC was approximately 275 volts due to cell
conduction and the current limiting resistor. As the voltage is reduced, the current also is reduced and a current-voltage
(I-V) characterization of the conduction is produced.

Figure 4. Measured I-V characteristic of a LEC cell tested at -55 ◦C conducted over a 2 minute time period.

Figure 4. I-V relationship between current and voltage at -55◦C.

The lower plot (ﬁg. 4b) is current vs. voltage (I-V). Surprisingly however, on closer examination of the raw data
it appears that the current goes to zero before the voltage goes to zero. Figure 5 is a semilog plot of the current vs.
voltage (I-V) data which shows a change in the slope that started occurring at about 28 volts and the measured voltage
does not go zero to as the current tends toward zero.

Figure 6 shows that as V approaches zero with slope m ≈ 0.0241, the current, Ie(V ), does not extrapolate to
zero as the term I1/3
e
(0)3 ≈ 1.3 remains. However, the Thomsons’ [13] write V (i) as a polynomial in current density
i, i.e., V = Ai2 + Bi. This is a signiﬁcant difference since the LEC curve is convex up while the Thomsons’
curve is concave down. This difference may be attributed to fugacity loading of the Pd with increased voltage and a
commensurate increase in the ionization ﬂux.

3.2. Experiments without external voltage supply:
These surprising results could easily be checked by removing all external voltage and current from the LEC cell. As
shown in Figure 1, to eliminate any possibility of a sneak circuit from the LabJack instrumentation system, the only
instrumentation attached to the LEC was a DVM (Digital Voltmeter) with a 10 MΩ internal impedance in parallel with
a variable load resistor R resulting in an effective resistance of 936 kΩ.

Figure 5. Semilog plot of data from the LEC cell test of ﬁgure 4 showing that the current goes to zero before the cell voltage goes to zero.

Figure 6. Plot of the cube root of the current vs the potential – Blue: Experimental data – Red: polynomial data ﬁt: I (V )1/3 =
 
mV + I1/3
e
 
where m ≈ 0.0241 (33) and I1/3
e
(0) ≈ 1.3.

When the codeposited Pd WE cell was assembled and ﬁlled with hydrogen, it self-initiated and self-sustained the
production of both an ‘open circuit (10 MΩ)’ a voltage and a ‘short-circuit’ (680 Ω) current. To properly characterize
a LEC cell both ‘open-circuit’ and ‘closed-circuit’ measurements are needed. An even better characterization can be
made if multiple I-V(R) values can be obtained. LEC output as a function of temperature is plotted in Figure 7, where
the ‘open-circuit (RL∼936 kΩ)’ voltage increased from approximately 10 µV at 28 ◦C to more than 525 mV at a
temperature of 185 ◦C, an increase in voltage of over 50,000:1.

Self-sustaining LECs such as shown in Figure 1 are load tested by changing the variable load resistor that is in
parallel with the DVM as shown in Figure 1. The variable R resistor box has 24 resistance values ranging from 1 MΩ
down to 10 Ω where the voltage produced at each resistance used, about 17 descending resistance values, is plotted in
Figure 8.

Figure 7. Plot of LEC cell temperature and ‘open-circuit (∼936 kΩ)’ voltage vs. time.

Figure 8. Plot of LEC cell voltage as a function of resistance at room temperature.

The resistance load was changed at approximately 12 second intervals in order to avoid deloading hydrogen from
the palladium hydrogen-host-material. When the resistance value was switched from 680 Ω back to 1 M Ω, a time
constant of voltage recovery is observed which may be related to the diffusion and mobility of hydrogen ions in the
gas due to the change in electric ﬁeld strength in the gas.

Figure 9 is a plot of LEC cell load testing of the cell performance shown in Figure 7 at three temperatures of
80, 140, and 185 ◦C. The three curves at the top of the ﬁgure plot the LEC voltage versus resistance for each tempera-
ture and the lower curves plot the calculated load current using Ohms law as well as the calculated shunt current that
depends on cell voltage.

Of particular note is the relatively constant current observed for low values of load resistance when the voltage
across the cell is small. Two possible mechanisms to produce a constant current include the direct charge method
that can take place in a vacuum wherein particles or ions emitted by radioactive decay, thermionic emission, or the
photoelectric effect and the diffusion of ions in a gas due to a concentration gradient. This constant current behavior
is in contrast to the predicted I-V behavior reported by Thomson and others at higher values of cell voltage. By
neglecting diffusion in their analysis, they report that for small values of the voltage, the current increases linearly
with voltage until asymptotically approaching a constant value that they called the saturation current at high values
of voltage. This linear behavior at low voltage is observed for a LEC when calculating its shunt current. However,
when evaluating LEC performance, care should be taken to collect voltage data for low resistance values to quantify
the diffusion current conduction behavior of LEC cells.

Figure 9. Plot of voltage and currents of a LEC cell as a function of load resistance at three different temperatures. See text for explanations of
ILoad, IShunt, and IRadiation.

The power curves peak at the point where the LEC cell internal impedance matches the external load impedance
which is predicted by electrical engineering theory and is typical of conventional power supplies. Of note, the open-
circuit voltage and the short-circuit current of a LEC which does not require radioactive material is comparable to a
commercial P100 NanoTritiumTM nuclear battery that uses 225 mCi of radiation.

Figure 11 illustrates a possible combined phenomenological, physical, and electrical representation to explain the
electrical behavior of the experimental palladium-hydrogen (Pd-H), palladium-deuterium (Pd-D), and iron-hydrogen
(Fe-H) LEC cells that have been measured experimentally.

This is similar to a Norton equivalent circuit of a two-terminal linear electrical device where the current source
and the cell impedance are the Norton circuit elements, however, in this LEC cell equivalent circuit the impedance
ZC depends upon the voltage. Inspection of the LEC cell’s current behavior indicates that the cells behave as if the
observed current originates from a current source. Thus, in the schematic representation, the cell’s radiation generated
gradient of ion density is shown as a current source. The working electrode and counter electrode are shown as having
work functions (WFs) that might possibly be different for the working electrode and the counter electrode due to the
different materials that might be used for these electrodes. For the LEC cell the hydrogen (1H2) or deuterium (2H2)
gas and its associated ions also are indicated. The internal ion-ion plasma conduction current IShunt and cell voltage
VLEC characterize a variable voltage conduction impedance ZC. The electrical capacitance of the cell is represented
by CCell. The external variable load impedance is represented by ZL and the load current ILoad is represented by an
arrow.

Figure 10. Plots the LEC cell load power as a function of load resistance at the three temperature of the cell in ﬁgure 9.

Figure 11. Combined phenomenological and physical schematic based on a Norton equivalent circuit.

The changes in the cell’s load currents at higher cell voltages can be explained by an increasing internal cell current
IShunt that shunts some of the thermally generated spontaneous radiation generated current, IRadiation, away from the
load impedance ZL and through the voltage variable internal cell impedance ZC The changes in the cell’s ‘short-circuit’
current and ‘open-circuit’ voltage capability and performance at higher temperatures can be explained by hypothesiz-
ing that IRadiation = I0exp(−Ea/kBT ) where Ea is an activation energy associated with the WE, kB is Boltzmann’s
constant, and kBT is the thermal energy associated with the hydrogen-host-material’s lattice and its occluded hydro-
gen. This hypothesis is supported by the fact that when an Arrhenius plot, ln(IRadiation) = −(Ea/kB)(1/T )+ln(I0),
of the radiation current at the three temperatures 80, 140 and 185 ◦C was made it resulted in a straight line of slope
–(Ea/kB ) resulting in a calculated activation energy of 0.601 eV. The formation of vacancies in metals also is of the
form Nvacancies = N0exp(−Ea/kBT ) and this suggests that vacancies may play a signiﬁcant role in the performance
of a LEC. The activation energy of vacancies in Pd is between 1.41 and 1.52 eV [20].

Figure 12. Example of complex spontaneous LEC cell behavior as a function of time and temperature.

Figure 12 is included as an example of a self-initiating and self-sustaining LEC cell that changed polarity three
times over a 4-day period. The LEC voltage was initially negative and it became positive as the temperature was
increased. When the temperature decreased, the LEC voltage went back negative and then it gradually increased to
positive even though the temperature remained relatively constant. Load tests conducted when the voltage was negative
and when it was positive are similar to load tests for cells that maintain a relatively steady voltage. Similar behavior
has been observed in multiple LEC cells. The cause is not known although one possibility might be a change in work
function of the materials as hydrogen loading changes and as the electrode surfaces are subjected to ionizing radiation.
This behavior is another example of the complex nature of what appears to be a simple device.


4. Analysis of experimental results

4.1. Theory:
Although the physical processes that give rise to the ionizing radiation in a LEC are not understood, there is a well-
developed theory for the conduction of electricity through gases. In his lectures on The Discharge of Electricity
Through Gases [9] Thomson writes:
We shall ﬁnd that the analogy between a dilute solution of an electrolyte and gas exposed to Röntgen rays
holds through a wide range of phenomena, and we have found it of great use in explaining many of the
characteristic properties of the conduction through gases.

Although their electrical instrumentation was limited by today’s standards, and the analysis of the conduction of
electricity did not initially include the effects of ion diffusion or space-charge in the gas, Thomson and Rutherford’s
[8] experiments demonstrated:

The fact that the passage of a current of electricity through a gas destroys its conductivity explains a very
characteristic property of the leakage of electricity through gases exposed to Röntgen rays; that is, for a given
intensity of radiation the current through the gas does not exceed a certain maximum value whatever the
electromotive force may be. the gas gets, as it were, ‘saturated.’

A few years later, Thomson [10] gave a more mathematically detailed analysis of the conduction including the effect
of space-charge in the gas but sill without considering diffusion.
The electrical conductivity possessed by gases under certain circumstances—as for example when Röntgen
or uranium rays pass through the gas, or when the gas is in a vacuum-tube or in the neighbourhood of a piece
of metal · · · illuminated by ultra-violet light—can be regarded as due to the presence in the gas of charged
ions, the motion of these ions in the electric ﬁeld constituting the current.

Unfortunately, Thomson was not able to integrate the differential equation for the electric ﬁeld as a function of position
within the gas for the general case of a ﬁnite rate of ionization, q, and where the positive and negative ions have different
mobilities, i.e., have different drift velocities under the inﬂuence of the electric ﬁeld. Thomson gives an approximate
method for ﬁnding the electric ﬁeld in the gas when the number of positive ions is equal to the number of negative
ions. For the case of the electric ﬁeld between plane-parallel electrodes in air, he estimates that the electric ﬁeld at the
point between the electrodes where d2E/dx2 = 0 as 1/2.51 of the electric ﬁeld at the same point assuming that there
is no space-charge. Also, he gives a formula for ﬁnding this ratio for any gas whose mobility values are known and
this evaluates to ∼1/4.67 for hydrogen. A few years later, E. Riecke [21] and G. Mie [22] found approximate solutions
to the electric ﬁeld distribution in the gas for various ratios of current density to saturation current density.

In the latter part of the 19th century and the beginning of the 20th century the emphasis of researchers was to
understand the physics of conduction of electricity through gases. To this end most researchers took precautions to
ensure that their Röntgen (X-) rays or emissions from uranium salts did not fall on the electrodes of their experiments
which would produce additional ions due to the photoelectric effect.

With Townsend [15], a research student of Thomson, the emphasis shifted from experiments at low values of
electric ﬁeld to pressure, e.g., E/p < 2 where E has units of [V·cm−1] and p is measured in [mm Hg] or [Torr], to
experiments at high E/p > 2 where the inﬂuence of the impact of gas ions on the electrodes now became important
[23]. Since the discharges were self-sustaining at high E/p > 2, the role of external ionizing radiation became
less important. Other material that may be useful is Thomson’s Encyclopædia Britannica article [24] that includes an
analysis of the conduction when all of the ions are of the same sign and thus carry the same charge. Also, to understand
some of the electrical engineering issues that are important at high E/p it is instructive to review Peek’s [25] ‘Dielectric
Phenomena in High Voltage Engineering.’ In this book there are discussions of corona discharge and of gas breakdown
or arcing in cylindrical coordinates when E/p is high. Since a LEC operates at E/p <2, these phenomena as possible
explanations of LEC conduction can be eliminated and the more difﬁcult question of what is causing the conduction
can be undertaken.

It wasn’t until the work of the research physicist KK Darrow [16], while working at the Bell Telephone Laborato-
ries, that the emphasis on the analysis of the conduction of electricity through gases changed and he wrote:
It is the condition of the conductive gas which matters ﬁrst and most; we have to analyze it, to identify the
various kinds of particles charged and chargeless which make it up, determine their numbers and their speeds,
and then (if possible) discover how the applied potential-difference and the other agencies of the environment
F.E. Gordon and H.J. Whitehouse / Journal of Condensed Matter Nuclear Science 35 (2022) 30–48
bring this state into being. As for the current, that may well be regarded as a minor perturbation of the
conducting system.

In his analysis of the conducting system of three equations, following Riecke [21], Darrow includes both the effect
of the electric ﬁeld and of the diffusion of the ions in the gas. He ﬁnds that diffusion of ions due to positive and
negative ion concentration gradients, –D1dn1/dx and –D2dn2/dx respectively, has the same effect as the drift of
ions due to the electric ﬁeld. Thus, when he writes the equation for the current density per unit area, i, one term
involves the product of the density of ions, n, times the electric ﬁeld, E, and the ions mobility, µ, while the other term
involves the gradient of ion density, dn/dx, times the diffusion-coefﬁcient, D, which is by Einstein’s relationship for
gases, the ion mobility times Boltzmann’s constant times the ion temperature in Kelvin, i.e., D = µkeV T cm2/s where
keV = kB/e[eV · K−1] may be substituted in place of kB so that the conduction equations now become:
q − αn1n2 + D1d2n1/dx2 − µ1d (En1) dx = 0
q − αn1n2 + D2d2n2/dx2 + µ2d (En2) dx = 0
Where q is the ionization rate, n is the number of ion-pairs ionized per second per cubic centimeter, and α the recom-
bination rate which is approximately 1.4 × 10−6 cm3/s for H2 and 1.6 × 10−6 cm3/s for air.
i = e[(n1µ1 + n2µ1)E + (D2dn2/dx − D1dn1/dx)]
Darrow in chapter V on the “Elementary Theory of Drift” further notes in equations 66, on page 193, reproduced here
as (4), that if n1 ≈ n2 then:
by making n1 and n2 equal and denoting each of them by n, we get:
i/e = n(µ1 + µ2)E + (D2 − D1) dn/dx
an equation easy to integrate when the mobilities and the diffusion coefﬁcients are assumed independent of x.
What is peculiarly interesting is that E and i do not necessarily vanish together [emphasis added].

Darrow’s equation (4) now explains the surprising inferences that can be drawn from LEC experimental results as
shown in Fig. 5 and Fig. 6. In the case of Fig. 5 the current went to zero as the impressed test voltage was approaching
zero because the LEC cell was producing a current ﬂowing in the opposite direction to the impressed current as a result
of diffusion of the ions due to an ion concentration gradient within the cell. In the case of Fig. 6, i.e., the extrapolation
of the current to zero, the cell current effectively goes to zero when a high value of resistance such as a DVM is
connected to the cell.

Darrow comments that this result can be interpreted as follows: [emphasis added]
Suppose the ions of the two signs are spread identically through a gas between two walls—by ‘identically’
I mean that everywhere the concentrations of the two kinds are equal, though their common value varies
from place to place—and that this state of affairs is stationary. Then there must be ionizing rays acting
continually on the gas, and also there must be a potential-difference between the walls. For if there
were no ﬁeld, the negatives would diffuse along the concentration-gradient more rapidly than the positives;
there would be a net current; this would result in a depletion of negatives, and an excess of positive charge
would arise in the gas, in contradiction with the assumption. But suppose there is a P.D. [Potential Difference]
between the walls, in such a sense as to oppose the negatives and pull the positives forward as they stream
together down the gradient. A value for this potential-difference can be found, such that the ﬁeld strength will
retard the negatives and encourage the positives just sufﬁciently to annul the net current aforesaid;
F.E. Gordon and H.J. Whitehouse / Journal of Condensed Matter Nuclear Science 35 (2022) 30–48
This potential-difference is just the voltage that the DVM measures and thus the ‘peculiar’ behavior of a LEC is
explained, including the increase in LEC voltage with temperature since, by the Einstein relationship for gases, the
diffusion coefﬁcient, D = µkBT , increases with temperature. There could also be a contribution to potential differ-
ence. due to different work functions of the electrodes but this is not required as Darrow has shown. In summary: the
gas in a LEC must contain ions because it conducts electricity; there are approximately an equal number of positive
and negative ions since the cell’s conduction remains essentially the same when the polarity of the applied potential
reverses; there must be an ion concentration gradient since the cell generates a current when the electric ﬁeld, E, tends
to zero as the load resistance RL tends to zero.

Thus, Darrow’s inclusion of the drift term in the conduction equation explains the ‘peculiar’ I-V characteristics
that were experimentally observed and also indicates that diffusion is one of the processes occurring within a LEC.
Not explained is the cause of the spontaneous ionizing radiation or why the ion density in the cell appears to be
non-uniform. One possible explanation for the later is that the WE emits ionizing radiation that produces energetic
photo-electrons at the CE and these in turn ionize the gas in proximity to the CE thus producing an ion concentration
gradient.

There are limitations with the above analysis since assuming in (4) that n1 = n2 = n implies that there is no
space-charge. This is equivalent to assuming that the electric ﬁeld, E, is given by the relationships E(x) = V/L
for plane-parallel geometry or E(r) = V/[rln(b/a)] for cylindrical geometry where a ≤ r ≤ b and where V is the
potential-difference between the electrodes, L is their separation for plane-parallel geometry, and a and b are the inner
radius and outer radius of the electrodes respectively with cylindrical electrode geometry.

Darrow writes:
Space-charge would play no part, of course, if n1 and n2 were equal; but this is a condition which the
difference in the mobility of the two kinds of ions makes difﬁcult to approach—one easily sees that if carriers
of both signs are generated at an equal rate, and the negatives drift faster than the positives, there will be fewer
negatives than positives at any moment between the plates. However it is interesting to simplify the equations
in the way that would be permissible were n1 and n2 sufﬁciently nearly the same.

Experience has shown that this type of approximation is useful since the dominant term in the calculation of
radiation-induced current, Irad, is the term (i/e) where i = (I/Sm) which in SI or CGSA units is ∼ 6.2415 × 1018
(I/Sm) where Irad is the short-circuit cell current, typically about 10−6 A and Sm is the cross sectional area near
the middle of the conduction path where d2E(x)/dx2 = 0. L.B. Loeb [18] includes information learned up to and
including WWII and suggests that there is a “. . . rejuvenation of the ﬁeld of study previously called The Discharge of
Electricity in Gases, and now more properly called Gaseous Electronics.” Of particular importance to the understanding
of LEC performance was the development of ionization chambers [26]. An ionization chamber such as a Gerdien
Condenser [27] that is designed to measure the number of ions in the gas as it ﬂows through the device, measures
the saturation current produced by the radiation ﬂux in a ﬁxed volume of gas when exposed to ionizing radiation.
Rossi and Staub [26] calculate the densities of positive and negative ions due to ionization for both the case where
recombination and diffusion are neglected and when they are included. A particular type of ionization chamber, i.e.,
a reentrant well-type or 4pi ionization chamber, is similar to a LEC in that the radiation source to be measured is
internal to the chamber in much the same way that the WE of a LEC is internal to the device. Thus, the question of
the distribution of the electric ﬁeld within the gas is important, however, modern computers have made the numerical
evaluation of the ﬁeld due to space charge possible. Several papers [28] [29] [30] [31] describe these recent results
for plane-parallel, cylindrical, and spherical electrode geometries. While they also neglect the diffusion terms, they
are good at predicting the shunt term. However, even this analysis does not predict I-V characteristics of the LEC
experimental measurements which indicate that LEC results are driven by the diffusion of the ions within the gas.

4.2. Estimating LEC cell performance:
The estimation of a LEC cell’s performance depends on whether the measurements are external voltage induced con-
duction or spontaneous conduction. For voltage induced conduction, start with a measurement of the I-V characteristics
of the cell using the instrumentation conﬁguration shown in Fig. 2 for a number of different supply voltages. A typical
value of cathode resistance, Rcat, is 10 kΩ and a typical value of the supply voltage current limiting resistance, Rsup
is 1 MΩ. This ratio of resistances ensures that the maximum voltage presented to the instrumentation system is limited
to 10 volts and the maximum current is limited to 1 microampere. The current through the cell is Icell and the voltage
across the cell, Vcell, is Vcell = Vanode – Vcathode. The cell may be installed with either the working electrode (WE)
or the counter electrode (CE) as the anode.

An initial estimate of the cell’s performance may be made by assuming plane-parallel electrode geometry with
separation L and no space-charge in the gas. Then, the electric ﬁeld is E = Vcell/L and the current density is i = Icell/S
where S is the cross-sectional area of the conduction path between the electrodes. Let the density of positive ions, n1,
and negative ions, n2, each be equal to n(x) a function of position where x is measured from the anode. This assumption
is equivalent to assuming the ionized gas is an ion-ion plasma. Let U = (µ1 + µ2) where µ1 is the mobility of the
positive ions and µ2 is the mobility of the negative ions with µ2 > µ1. Let U21 = (µ2 − µ1) and denote Boltzmann’s
constant as keV ≈ 8.6173x10−5eV · K−1, so that the difference in diffusion coefﬁcients is D2 − D1 = U21keV T .

Then equation (4) may be rewritten as
i/e = Un (x) E + U21keV T n′ (x)
with solution
n (x) = (i/e) /UE + Cexp (−UEx/U21keV T )
where C is a constant of integration, T is the cell’s temperature in kelvin, 1/e ≈ 6.2415 × 1018A−1 · s−1 is the
reciprocal of the elementary charge, e := 1.602 176 634 A · s, and dn(x)/dx = n′(x).

An estimate of the magnitude of the ratio of ions at the cathode to ions at the anode can be found by solving eq
(5) when i ≈ 0. After integration ln(nL/n0) = −Un(L)V |I≈0/U21 so that when V |I≈0 > 0 as in Fig. 5, then
ln(nL/n0) < 0 and 0 < nL/n0 < 1 and the maximum ion density occurs at the anode which is the CE for the Pd-D
cell of Fig. 2. Additionally, let x = 0 then the constant C is found to be C = n(0)|I≈0 = n0.

For the case of spontaneous LEC conduction, only the LEC voltage, VLEC(R, T ), is measured as a function of
effective load resistance, R = RLoadRDVM/(RLoad + RDVM) and ILoad is calculated using Ohm’s Law as ILoad =
VLEC/R. From the phenomenological description of a LEC in Fig. 11, ILoad = IRadiation – IShunt. Since iShunt is
the internal current through the gas caused by the drift of the ions due to the electric ﬁeld, E(x), so that iShunt may
be estimated as neUE(x). A general analytic expression for the electric ﬁeld is not known. However, as is shown by
Thomson [10], [12], and Thomson and Thomson [13], n1 ≈ n2 ≈ n is correct only when dE/dx ≈ 0 which occurs
away from the electrodes. In a cylindrical electrode geometry LEC with close electrode spacing, the approximation
dE/dx ≈ d(rE)/dr = 0 may not be valid. Thus E(x) ̸= VLEC/L and iRadiation must be estimated ﬁrst since
iShunt = iRadiation – iLoad.

Since the magnitude of drift velocity of the ions is |v1(x)| = µ1E(x) and |v2(x)| = µ2E(x), as R is reduced,
VLEC and E(x) are also reduced which results in a decrease in drift velocity. This in turn leads to an increase in the
time that the positive and negative ions have to recombine and no longer contribute to the cell’s conduction. This
is shown in Fig. 9 as a reduction of the measured IRadiation(R, T ) for small R. Observe that I(R, T ) may vary
for small R so select its maximum value Imax. Assume that there is no space charge, i.e., from Gauss’ law, div
E(x) = ρ/ε = e(n1 − n2)/ε = 0, where E is the electric ﬁeld, ε is the permittivity of the gas and ρ is the volume
charge density or charge per unit volume. Rewrite the left-hand side of equation (4) in terms of iRadiation as
(iRadiation/e) = (Imax + epsilon)/Se = nAverage

Figure 13. Plot of the predicted shunt current by Thompson (Red) which does not include the diffusion terms and experimental data which includes
diffusion.

where in CGSA units 6.2415 × 1018 ≈ 1/e, e := 1.602176634 × 10−19 A ·A s is the elementary charge, Imax [A] is
the measured LEC cell’s load current when VLEC[V ] ≈ 0, epsilon is a small number, S [cm2] is the cross-sectional
area of the conduction path, n [ip · cm−3] is the average ion-pair density nAverage = ∫ L
0 n(x)dx/L. The geometry is assumed to be plane-parallel electrodes since this last assumption can be corrected by a change of variables [32] and
usually is a small error even if not corrected.

The cell’s internal shunt current density, ishunt(R) may be found by subtracting iload(R) from irad = Imax/S after
adding a small number, epsilon, to irad in order to be able to make a semilog plot of ishunt(R) versus R without
encountering a zero value of ishunt(R). An estimate of the error made in assuming that there is no space charge can be
made by calculating a hypothetical ihypot(R) = nhypot·U·VLEC(R) and varying nhypot until it overlays ishunt(R). This
is shown in Fig. 13. That the ion density n ̸= nhypot is different in the two calculation is the result of Thomson’s [12]
and Mie’s [22] ﬁnding that when there is space charge E ̸= V/L.

The LEC’s power, P(R, T), delivered to the effective load resistance, R = RLoadRDVM/(RLoad + RDVM), at
temperature T is just P(R, T ) = VLEC2/R. Figure 10 experimentally illustrates this behavior, and the value of
maximum power occurs at an intermediate value of load resistance.


5. LEC performance observations

Although both the origin as well as the nature of the LEC radiation that ionizes the gas and provides the measured
spontaneous voltage and current is unknown, certain observations about the performance of a LEC can be made. Some
observations about LEC performance include:
(a) a necessary but not sufﬁcient condition for sustained LEC operation is that the working electrode must be com-
prised in part of hydrogen-occluded hydrogen host material that is in ﬂuidic contact with a gas containing hydrogen;
(b) hydrogen host material lattice vacancies, superabundant vacancies, and other defects such as those produced
during co-deposition of Pd or Fe from an aqueous solution have been shown to produce ionizing radiation from an
active working electrode;
(c) a necessary condition is that the gas be comprised in part of hydrogen, or its non-radioactive isotope deuterium,
although sustained conduction at a low level has been observed in air indicating that the amount of hydrogen may not
need to be large;
F.E. Gordon and H.J. Whitehouse / Journal of Condensed Matter Nuclear Science 35 (2022) 30–48
(d) reconnecting the electrodes from that shown in Figure 2 to reverse the polarity of the electrical potential,
e.g.
high voltage supply connected to the working electrode and load resistance connected to the counter elec-
trode, causes a temporary increase in conductivity but does not appreciably change the long term steady state
conductivity;
(e) voltage induced conduction experiments using deuterium gas at T ≈ −55 ◦C show that ions in the gas due to
relative humidity are not causing the conduction since at this temperature the number of water (D2O) ions is completely
negligible;
(f) corona discharge cannot be responsible for the conduction since both the electric ﬁeld due to the spontaneous
voltage is too low to produce corona discharge [Peek 1929] and the gas pressures, typically ∼500 Torr to ∼3 bar is too
great for a discharge;
(g) thermal ionization of the gas is not responsible for the LEC conduction since both reported data [34] and Saha’s
equation [35] shows that temperatures greater that approximately 2000 K would be needed;
(h) natural ionizing radiation from cosmic rays, the environment, or from the small amount of radioactive isotopes
in the hydrogen host material or from tritium in the hydrogen gas cannot be the source of the ionization of the gas since
an experiment where the working electrode was bare but contained approximately 6 µCi (∼ 90 % α and ∼10 % γ) of
radiation did not produce measurable conduction from the ions produced by the α-particles or from the photoelectric
effect due to the γ-radiation produced by the WE;
(i) after extensive testing, Rout, et al. [36] were unable to identify the speciﬁc ionization that was fogging the
ﬁlm and ultimately, “proposed that some new, unknown agency emitted from the loaded palladium is responsible for
fogging.”
Possible physical mechanisms that might produce the initial ionizing radiation at the working electrode include:
(a) thermally induced vibration of the hydrogen host material’s lattice enhanced by nonlinear wave-wave mixing
in conjunction with the presence of hydrogen occluded in lattice vacancies near the surface of the hydrogen host
material;
(b) thermally induced interaction between multiple occluded hydrogen atoms contained within a vacancy particu-
larly when different nuclear spin orientations are present or between an occluded hydrogen atom in the vacancy and a
hydrogen host material’s atom.


6. Conclusions

A number of LEC devices have been constructed including independent replications which produce spontaneous volt-
age and current. Although the measurements only consist of the voltage as a function of time and temperature produced
across various load resistances the following conclusions can be drawn from an extended mathematical analysis of the
measurements:
(a) the spontaneous current produced by a LEC is essentially constant and is primarily due to the diffusion of ions.
This diffusion induced current can be measured when the LEC voltage is minimized by resistance loading of the cell
and the corresponding ion concentration can be estimated using an induced conduction test and measuring the voltage
at which the induced current goes to zero as shown in Fig. 5;
(b) From the theory of the Conduction of Electricity through Gases it is known that in the absence of emitted
particles, e.g., radioactive decay particles, thermal electrons, or photo-electric effect electrons, the gas must be ionized
and the average ionization density can be calculated. This historical theory may also be used to estimate the shunt
current in the cell due to the ion mobility and the electric ﬁeld and can be estimated, as a function of temperature,
based on the measured current-voltage (I-V) characteristics as shown in Fig 9;
(c) for a Pd-H LEC at 185 ◦C ion average densities greater than 1010 ion-pairs (ip) per cubic centimeter have been
calculated from experimental measurements;
F.E. Gordon and H.J. Whitehouse / Journal of Condensed Matter Nuclear Science 35 (2022) 30–48
(d) at a ﬁxed temperature the magnitude of the spontaneous current ﬂowing in an attached load resistance decreases
at the same time that the shunt current increases due to a voltage increase with increasing load resistance value. Thus,
the maximum power that can be drawn from a LEC occurs at some intermediate resistance value as shown in Fig 10.


References
Y. Fukai, The Metal-Hydrogen System, Second Edition, (Springer, 2005).
F.A. Lewis, The Palladium Hydrogen System, (Academic Press, 1967).
F.A. Lewis,
The Palladium Hydrogen System,
Platinum Metals Rev. 26(1) (1982) 20-27,
Also available at
https://gsvit.ﬁles.wordpress.com/2014/01/platinum-metals-the- palladium-hydrogen-system.pdf
H. Sainte-Claire Deville, L. Troost, Sur la Perméabilité du Fer à Haute Température, [On the Permeability of Iron at High
Temperature ], Comptes rendus, 57 (1863) 965-967.
T. Graham, On the Occlusion of Hydrogen Gas by Metals, Proc. Roy. Soc., 15 (1868) 422-427.
H. Mehrer, Diffusion in Solids, (Springer, 2007).
J.P. Biberian in private communication with F E Gordon and also in his presentation at the French RNBE 2020 Conference,
21 November 2020.
J.J. Thomson, E. Rutherford, XL. On the Passage of Electricity through Gases exposed to Röntgen Rays, Phil. Mag. S5 42
(1896) 392-407.
J.J Thomson, The Discharge of Electricity Through Gases. (Archibald Constable & Co., Westminster, UK, 1898), reprinted
(Charles Scribner’s Sons, New York, 1903).
[10] J.J. Thomson, XIX. On the theory of the conduction of electricity through gases by charged ions, Phil. Mag. S5 47:286 (1899)
253-268. Also available from https://zenodo.org/record/2226317#.YFFzOriZegc
[11] J.J. Thomson, Conduction of Electricity Through Gases, (Cambridge at the University Press, 1903).
[12] J.J. Thomson, Conduction of Electricity Through Gases, (Cambridge at the University Press, 1906), Also avail-
able from https://books.google.com.py/books?printsec=frontcover&dq=editions:ISBN117762950X&id=_8RzAAAAIAAJ&
output=text
[13] J.J. Thomson, G.P. Thomson, Conduction of Electricity Through Gases, 3rd edn. Vol. I, General Properties of Ions, Ionization
by Heat and Light, (Cambridge at the University Press, UK, 1928).
[14] J.J. Thomson, Conduction of Electricity Through Gases, 3rd edn. Vol. II, Ionization by Collision and the Gaseous Discharge,
(Cambridge at the University Press, UK, 1933).
[15] JSE Townsend, Electricity in Gases, Chapter III, (Oxford at the Clarendon Press, UK, 1915).
[16] K.K. Darrow, Electrical Phenomena in Gases, (The Williams & Wilkins Co. Baltimore, MD, 1932). Also available on line at
Google Books.
[17] L.B. Loeb, Fundamental Processes of Electrical Discharges in Gases, (John Wiley & Sons, 1939).
[18] L.B. Loeb, Basic Processes of Gaseous Electronics, (University of California Press, 1960).
[19] H. R. Carlon, “Electrical Conductivity and Infrared Radiometry of Steam,” US Army Armament Research and Development
Command, ARCSL-SP-80006, Apr 1980.
[20] O. Vekilova, D.I. Bazhanov, S. Simak, I Abrikosov, First-principles study of the vacancy-hydrogen interaction in Pd, Phys.
Rev. B 80(2) (2009) 24101. Also available from http://urn.kb.se/resolve?um=urn:se:liu:diva-19890
F.E. Gordon and H.J. Whitehouse / Journal of Condensed Matter Nuclear Science 35 (2022) 30–48
[21] E. Riecke, Über näherungsweise gesättigte Ströme zwischen plan-parallelen Platten [About approximately saturated currents
between plane-parallel plates], Nachrichten von der Gesellschaft Wissenschaften zu Göttingen [News from the Society of
Sciences in Göttingen], Available at https://gdz.sub.uni-goettingen.de/id/PPN252457811_1903
[22] G. Mie, Der elektrische Strom in ionisierter Luft in einem ebenen Kondensator [The electric current in ionized air in a
plane capacitor], Annalen der Physik, Vierte Folge, Band 13 5 857-889 Also available from https://www.semanticscholar.org/
paper/Der-elektrische-Strom-in-ionisierter-Luft-in-einem-Mie/303d7417bccc82df50c510294b659c325aaca920 click on the
(pdf) zenodo.org link
[23] R. Papoular, Electrical Phenomena in Gases, Chapter 10, (American Elsevier Publishing Company, Inc., New York, 1965),
First published in France in 1963 by (Dunod, Éditeur, under the title Les Phénomènes Électriques dans les Gaz, 1963)
[24] JJ Thomson, III Electric Conduction through Gases, Encylopædia Britannica, Vol 6, 1911.
[25] F.W. Peek Jr, Dielectric Phenomena in High Voltage Engineering, (McGraw-Hill 1929).
[26] B.B. Rossi, H.H. Staub, Ionization Chambers and Counters, McGraw-Hill Book Co. 1949).
[27] H. Gerdien, Ein neuer Apparat zur Messung der elektrischen Leitfähigkeit der Luft [A new device for measuring the conduc-
tivity of air] (1905) Göttingen, K. Nachr . Ges . Wiss . Mathem.physik. Kl. 1905.
[28] D. Novkovi´c et al., Numerical solutions of differential equations of a cylindrical ionization chamber, Phys. Med. Bio. 41
(1996) p. 725.
[29] D. Novkovi´c et al., Numerical solutions of differential equations of an ionization chamber: plane-parallel and spherical
geometry, Phys. Med. Bio. 43 (1998) 559-575.
[30] D.G. Stoyanov, Current-voltage characteristic of parallel-plane ionization chamber with inhomogeneous ionization, JINST 2
(2007) P08007. Also available at https://arxiv.org/ftp/arxiv/papers/0706/0706.3913.pdf
[31] D.G. Stoyanov, Analytical form of current-voltage characteristic of parallel-plane, cylindrical, and spherical ioniza-
tion chambers with homogeneous ionization, JINST 2 (2007) P11006. Also available at https://arxiv.org/ftp/arxiv/papers/
0708/0708.0409.pdf
[32] P.A. Tate, P.C. East, The Saturation Curve in Ionization Chambers, Report No. 355, Defence Research Chemical Laboratories,
(1961) Ottawa Canada.
[33] W. Binks, Energy per Ion Pair, Acta Radiologica, 41:sup1 17 (1954) 85-104.
[34] J.M. Yos, Transport Properties of Nitrogen, Hydrogen, Oxygen, and Air to 30,000◦K, Technical Memorandum RA-TM-63-7
(AD-435053) 22 Mar 1963 Also available at https://apps.dtic.mil/sti/pdfs/AD0435053.pdf
[35] D.J.
Jeffery,
An
Educational
Note
on
the
Saha
Equation
and
its
Solution
for
the
Ionization
State
of
a
Gas,
Available
at http://www.physics.unlv.edu/∼jeffery/astro/educational_notes/100_saha.pdf
Also see Anonymous,
https://www.astro.princeton.edu/∼gk/A403/ioniz.pdf
[36] R. K. Rout, et al., Reproducible, anomalous emissions from palladium deuteride/hydride. Fusion Technol., 1996. 30: p. 273.
