INTRODUCTION

We have tried to find the reaction system which has strong neutron emission
with adequate reproducibility using many shapes of Pd electrode in the heavy
water electrolysis. Till today, more than 30 Pd electrodes of different shapes
have been examined under the almost same electrolysis conditions, under which
we have detected appreciable neutron bursts using thin Pd plates as the cathode
in three times with good reproducibility. Including these, only 6 cases gave
neutrons including large neutron burst with more than 10a from a spiral Pd wire
electrode. Recently, we detected an anomalous neutron bursts occurred five times
periodically in a 140 hours operation with strong neutron emissions. In the
present paper, the details of the neutron burst are described.


EXPERIMENTAL

The Pd electrodes used for the experiments were treated before the electrolysis as reviously reported. 1 The electrolytic cell was same as the previous one
in principle, but modified as shown in Fig.!. The electrode of size 5 mm¢ and
40 mm long Pd lod which absorbed D2 gas under 10 atm for 24 hours prior to the
electrolysis was placed in the electrolytic cell imediately after the gas
loading, and the electrolysis was performed in the constant current manner. The
electrolyte was 250 ml of heavy water:99. 7% and in which Li metal was dissolved
to contain 0.1 mole/dm3 of LiOD. The conditions of electrolysis were as
follows; the current density is 0.24 ----- 0.27 mA/cm2, voltage ......, 3V, in ambient
temperature of an airconditioned room. 

Fig. 1 The electrolytic cell 

Fig. 2 Crossectional view of
neutron detecting system 

The sectional view of the neutron detecting system is shown in Fig.2. The
system has 1 % detection efficiency of thermal neutron which was calibrated by
use of a 25 2Cf source. The frontal part of the system is oppened for the access.
The fresh heavy water was added into the cell during the electrolysis to keep
the level of the heavy water.


RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

The neutron counts detected from the present electrolytic cell are shown in
Fig.3. The first neutron burst event happened 22 h 40 min. after the start of
electrolysis operation and gave 59 neutron/10 min. which corresponds 4. 7 a to
the standard deviation of the background neutron. After this, four neutron burst
events were detected alomost periodically in each 20 hours. All of the neutron
burst events gave appreciable neutron counts more than 5 a. In these events,
the second event continued for 40 min. and the last (fifth) event continued for
50 min. The number of the evaluated source neutron are 30800/40 min. and 177900/
50 min. for the second event and fifth event, respectively. The details of the
neutron burst in the fifth event are shown in Fig.4 

Fig. 3 The neutron counts in the peridical neutron bursts 

Fig. 4 The details of neutron counts in the 5th. event 

The neutron burst data are summarized in Table 1. Here, we used the average
neutron counts detected in 10 hours before and after the events as the background for each event.

The fifth event had occurred from 136 hours after start of electrolyis and
continued for 50 min. with the many neutrons detected. The most strong neutron
burst observed in the second 10 min. and give 811 neutrons which correspond
135 a standard deviation. The number of the source neutron evaluated from the
detection efficiency (ca. 1%) of the 3He neutron countors is 177900 n/50 min.

Table 1 The details of the periodical neutron burst

The present meutron bursts show an anomously even as the cold fusion evidence
in preodically occurring of the events in relatively short operation time,
gradual increase of the number of neutrons and very strong evidence as seen in
the 5th event.

The reproducibility of the present event has been tested three times using
the same electrolytic system, however, any further event could not be found as
same as the other previous experiences of our group since 1989. We have carried
out more than 18 runs experiments by the same experimental procedures with 12
different shapes of Pd electrodes in the recent 10 months including
some cases of the reproducibility tests, only two runs gave the appreciable
neutron burst but no reproducibility. Thus, we concluded that the shapes of Pd
electrode is not essencial point for the neutron burst phenomenon, rather some
kind of irregurality caused by the electrolytic process in the homogenity of the
Pd electrodes seems to be essencial point.

The fusion rate is estimated to be 10- 21 fusion/d-d/sec. for the 5th. event
from the d/Pd ratio of ca. 0.2, the source neutron number and the weight of
original Pd electrode.


FUTURE WORK

After this finding, we employed a NE-213 (5 X 5 inch) liquid scintilation
detector with n-y pulse shape discrimination to check the energy of neutrons in
the neutron detecting system. Four other 3He detectors were also equipped to the
neutron detecting system to set up the two channels of the neutron detction, one
channel consists of 6 3He detectors and the other of 3 3He detectors. The total
neutron detecting efficiency become 1.6 %. The NE-213 detector has been examined
to have adequate sensitivity for high energy neutrons and the resolution power
to n-y discrimination for 2. 45 MeV neutron. Tri ti um monitoring system has been
alos examined to show the perfect recovery of tirtium with enough sensitivity.
Further experiments shall be carried out to elucidate the anomalous nuclear
phenomena occurred in d-Pd systems. [ IL DADO E TRATTO : ALEA IACTA EST]

Reference: 
T. Sato, M. Okamoto, P. Kim , 0. Aizawa and Y. Fujii, Fusion Technol.
19, 357-363, (1991). 

