1. The conference

The Tenth International Conference on Cold Fusion was held at the Royal Sonesta
Hotel in Cambridge, about a mile from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
August 24-29, 2003. More than 150 people registered for the conference. There
were 113 abstracts submitted prior to the conference, and several talks were added
during the conference. About 60 oral presentations were scheduled with 25 minutes
allowed for most talks. All oral presentations were given in the main hall, and
there were no parallel sessions. Abstracts were submitted for talks on excess heat
and related topics, tritium, transmutation, nuclear emissions, theory, and a small
number of other topics.

Recommendations from the local organizing committee
suggested that sessions on the diﬀerent topics be mixed. This was done (as can be
seen in Table 2 on the next page), and it seemed to work quite well.


2. Short course

George Miley proposed that a 1-day short course be developed in order to bring
people up to speed on topics of interest to the community. On Sunday, a 1-day short
course was presented, with talks by experimentalists and theorists as can be seen
in Table I. This was well-attended, and provided a forum for much give-and-take
between members of the community.

Table 1.ICCF10 Short course given on Sunday, August 24, 2003.

Table 2.
ICCF10 Program.


3. Topics

One can see from Table 2 the range of topics discussed at ICCF10. In response
to the often-asked question, “What is cold fusion?”, we might respond that cold
fusion is made up of the topics studied by people in the ﬁeld, which includes those
listed in Table 2. We will take the opportunity to discuss some of the topics and
interesting results presented at ICCF10 in what follows here.

3.1. Excess heat:
From the inception of the ﬁeld in 1989, the phenomenon of excess heat production
has been central to the ﬁeld. At previous conferences, we have seen heated discus-
sions of calorimetric approaches and issues, which played a central role at a time
when there was some uncertainty within the ﬁeld about the existence of an excess
heat eﬀect. We have also seen a variety of advances in the area, including:
(1) codeposited Pd
(2) excess heat in molten salt systems
(3) correlation of heat and helium
(4) positive feedback
(5) heat after death
(6) excess heat production with metals other than Pd
(7) correlation between excess heat and deuterium ﬂux
(8) Coehn eﬀect stimulation
(9) improvements in the area of technique and reproducibility
At ICCF10, there were several papers on the response of the excess heat eﬀect
to laser stimulation, which is new for the ICCF series. It was nice to see a new
US/Israeli enterprise contribute, and their excess heat results in glow discharge
experiments were very nice. The question of reproducibility was raised at the con-
ference on a number of occasions, with good reproducibility being claimed by several
experimentalists (Storms, Swartz, Case, and others). There was little discussion of
excess heat in light water systems at ICCF10, although there has been at previous
conference.

3.2. Tritium:
Tritium production was claimed to have been observed very early on in the ﬁeld, and
seemed to be related to helium production associated with excess heat. For example,
the helium appears to be born with little kinetic energy – certainly very much less
than 24 MeV. Early observations of an absence of neutron emission associated with
tritium production indicated that the kinetic energy of the triton was limited to
less than 10 keV (otherwise d+t reactions would have led to readily observable 14
MeV neutrons). In this sense, helium production and tritium production seem to be
similar. Tritium production was studied in years past by groups including Bockris,
Srinivasan, Storms and Talcott, Cedzynska, Gozzi, Claytor, Celani, Romodanov,
Clarke/SRI and others. In this proceedings, the paper by Romodanov on tritium
production is an important contribution in the area of experiment, and that of
Afonichev is intriguing. Tritium production was also discussed by Violante and
colleagues, but this was included in the Transmutation section since the focus of
the work seemed to be on this topic.

3.3. Transmutation:
Early claims of observations of transmutation eﬀects were greeted within the com-
munity with great skepticism.
It was one thing to think that low-level nuclear
emissions could occur, and quite another to contemplate the existence of an excess
heat eﬀect. But to imagine that new elements and isotopes could appear was more
than most could swallow. Several years and many more experiments later, the case
for transmutation is much stronger, and the results quite interesting. The collection
of strong papers in this volume on transmutation that appear in this proceedings
are indicative of the growing importance of the eﬀect within the ﬁeld.
In one view of transmutation, the diﬀerent eﬀects are divided into the following:
(1) modiﬁcation of isotopic distributions near the surface in Fleischmann-Pons cells
(Passell, others)
(2) elemental and isotopic anomalies that appear to be connected to local hot spots
(Dash, others)
(3) massive transmutations to both lower and higher mass nuclei commensurate with
energy production (Mizuno, Miley, others)
(4) mass 8 and charge 4 transmutation of impurities in a multilayer sample with
deuterium ﬂow (Iwamura, others)
(5) massive production of radioactive isotopes (Wolf)
(6) modiﬁcation of amounts of radioactive isotopes in a sample
At ICCF10, papers on several of these topics were presented. The Iwamura eﬀect
was introduced at ICCF9, and is an area of much excitement at the moment, due to
the hope that a clear example of a selective transmutation eﬀect will emerge. The
appearance of isotopic anomalies generally is attracting much interest in the ﬁeld
at present.

3.4. Nuclear emission:
The ﬁrst report of nuclear emissions from metal deuterides was due to Jones and
his colleagues at BYU, where evidence for low-level dd-fusion was presented. Since
that time, the range of eﬀects claimed has increased to include:
(1) low-level deuteron-deuteron fusion products (Jones, Scaramuzzi, Menlove, others)
(2) low-level energetic alpha ejection (Cecil, Lipson)
(3) low-level ion emission, not due to dd-fusion (Cecil)
(4) penetrating radiation that results in charged particles (Oriani)
We were fortunate to have strong papers at ICCF10 on all of these topics. Obser-
vations presented at ICCF10 by Ademenko and Vysostskii appear to suggest that
some kind of radiation is produced in the sample undergoing irradiation, and causes
massive transmutation on a remote foil. It would be nice to determine precisely ex-
perimentally what kind of radiation is involved.

3.5. Beam experiments:
There appear to be two interesting areas of interest in beam experiments. Numer-
ous experiments have been reported over the years that show an enhancement in
the deuteron-deuteron fusion rate at low energy in metal deuterides and in other
deuterated materials. As yet, there has been no agreed upon explanation for this,
other than it seems to be due to some kind of anomalous screening eﬀect. This eﬀect
is illustrated in the paper by Kitamura and colleagues. Lipson and coworkers have
argued that the glow discharge can be thought of as a high-ﬂux beam experiment,
and present some very interesting results suggesting that the experiments demon-
strating the enhancement in cross section can be extended to much lower energy in
this way.

The other interesting area that relate to beam experiments has to do with an
eﬀect discovered some years ago by Kasagi, in which very broad signals of fast
protons and fast alphas are observed in beam experiments where deuterons at 70-
100 keV are incident on TiD and PdD. It was proposed that these sign
due to a three-deuteron reaction, as such a reaction is the only candidate that
can match end-point energies with a very broad distribution. This was discussed
brieﬂy by Kasagi at ICCF10 in his oral presentation. A replication eﬀort carried
out at NRL was discussed by Hubler, but unfortunately no proceedings paper was
submitted. The paper by Takahashi and coworkers discusses work done at Osaka
on this problem.

3.6. Theory:
There have been a wide variety of theoretical approaches discussed over the years,
including anomalous screening eﬀects, weakly-interacting massive particles, black
holes, and many other speculative mechanisms. In recent years, theory contributions
have been tending to focus on a reduced set of models, reﬂecting the interests of
those still active in the ﬁeld. Motivated by the low-energy enhancement seen in the
deuteron-deuteron fusion yield, and by the observation of low-level fusion products,
many theorists are interested in models for screening in metal deuterides (Luo,
Frisone, and others). Such studies tend to be more conventional, in the sense that
no additional mechanisms are required to account for other anomalies.

Theorists that focus on the more general problem posed by the experimental
observations face much more diﬃcult problems. The contributions at ICCF10 can
largely be divided into a small number of catagories, including:
(1) resonant tunneling (Li)
(2) ion band states (S. Chubb, T. Chubb)
(3) Bose-Einstein condensates (Kim)
(4) multi-body fusion (Takahashi)
(5) neutron cluster (Fisher, Kozima)
(6) Preparata theory (Preparata, Del Giudice)
(7) phonon-exchange theory (Hagelstein)
Resonant tunneling models postulate the presence of a long-lived state roughly res-
onant with the that of two deuterons, and proceeds with otherwise conventional
physics (which predicts enhanced reaction rates). In ion band state models and
Bose-Einstein condensate models, the proponents argue that the eﬀects of Coulomb
repulsion are reduced or eliminated, leading to enhancements in reaction rates.
Scott Chubb has extended his approach to begin addressing phonon coupling and
energy exchange. In Takahashi’s model, several deuterons are assumed to tunnel
together at the same time. Fisher, and Kozima, have been interested in models
involving neutron clusters (neutral particles made up of several neutrons), which
have the feature that the Coulomb barrier is not present in interactions with other
nuclei. Preparata proposed Dicke-enhanced transitions from two-deuteron states to
4He states, mediated by electromagnetic coupling to plasmons. In the phonon ex-
change model, a highly-excited phonon mode is assumed, which couples to reactions
at diﬀerent sites, leading to new site-other-site reactions.


4. Demonstrations

Two demonstrations of excess heat production were given at MIT on Tuesday night.

One was presented by John Dash and his students Abhay Ambadkar (graduate
student); and Corrissa Lee, Shelsea Pedersen, and Ben Zimmerman (high school
summer interns). The cells are illustrated in Figure 1. Another was presented by
Mitchell Swartz, shown in Figure 2. Transportation from the conference to MIT
was provided, and most of the attendees were treated to a viewing and discussions
of the experiments. There had been concern about whether the demonstrations
would be working during the time allotted for viewing, and we were fortunate in
that both cells appeared to show excess heat during this time.

There was in addition a demonstration of excess heat and laser stimulation done
remotely over the Internet by Dennis Cravens and Dennis Letts. A photograph of
their experiment is shown in Figure 3.


5. The public comes to ICCF10

We invited the public to come to the conference on Monday night to see the poster
presentations, and to meet with researchers in the ﬁeld.
Dave Nagel gave an
overview of cold fusion research, and delighted the audience during the question
and answer period following his talk.

Figure 1.
Dash group demonstration at ICCF10, with Corissa Lee. Photographprovided courtesy
of Steve Krivit.


6. A typeset conference proceedings

New for this conference are the nice looking typeset manuscripts in the pages that
follow. We have been interested in moving toward developing an electronic journal
for the ﬁeld, which would require the development of a typesetting capability. So, it
seemed perhaps to be reasonable to attempt a typesetting of the ICCF10 conference
proceedings papers.

There are many reasons why this seemed to be a good idea. The International
Conference series has provided the primary outlet for publication for papers in the
cold fusion ﬁeld. These papers are being read by an increasing audience. As it is
common for scientists to judge the quality of the science reported in a paper by how
the paper looks or reads, it seems perhaps to be important to make the papers look
more professional. After all, much work typically goes into the research, as well as
into the writing. These proceedings papers are in many cases the only publication
of work that is done in the area. So we probably should treat these papers more
or less on par with journal publications until such time as journal publications in
general are allowed.

It was found that in the process of typesetting the papers, and in working with
the authors, that the quality of the papers in many cases tended to improve. In some
cases, simply typesetting the papers seemed to make them much more accessible
and understandable. In other cases, authors took the time to improve their papers
when they saw the eﬀort that was going into the typesetting.

Figure 2.
Mitchell Swartz demonstrating his cell for ICCF10 attendees. Photograph provided
courtesy of Dave Nagel.

The typesetting was done initially by Dr.
Kumar’s team at Elim Pre-press
Services of Velachery, Chennai, India. In most cases, relatively minor revisions of
the papers were required, such as corrections of the ﬁgure sizing and placement,
and these were done by the author.


7. Language revisions

Some of the papers submitted by authors for which English is a foreign language
were not easy to understand because of language issues.
In this proceedings, a
signiﬁcant revision of the wording was done in order to improve readability. The
most signiﬁcant revisions of this type were done (by P. L. Hagelstein) on papers by
Romodanov et al., Lipson et al., Karabut et al., and Vysostkii et al. The English
associated with the paper by Mizuno et al. was greatly improved by Jed Rothwell
from the as-submitted version, to the LENR-CANR version that we typeset.


8. Videotaping

The oral presentations at ICCF10 were videotaped by Gene Mallove, and can be
purchased as a collection of DVDs through Inﬁnite Energy magazine. The video
resolution is not great, so in presentations where the lettering size is large the
viewgraphs can be read, but in other presentations it is diﬃcult to see what is
being presented.

Figure 3.
The laser excess heat experiment used for the remote demonstration given by Letts
and Cravens during ICCF10. Photograph provided courtesy of Dennis Letts.


9. Absence of skeptics

Researchers in cold fusion have not had very good luck interacting with skeptics
over the years. This has been true of the ICCF conference series. Douglas Morrison
attended many of the ICCF conferences before he passed away. While he did provide
some input as a skeptic, many found his questions and comments to be uninteresting
(the answers usually had been discussed previously, or else concerned points that
seemed more political than scientiﬁc). It is not clear how many in the ﬁeld saw the
reviews of the conferences that he distributed widely. For example, at ICCF3 the
SRI team discussed observations of excess heat from electrochemical cells in a ﬂow
calorimeter, where the associated experimental errors were quite small and well-
studied. The results were very impressive, and answered basic questions about the
magnitude of the eﬀect, signal to noise, dynamics, reproducibility, and dependence
on loading and current density. Morrison’s discussion in his review left out nearly all
technical details of the presentation, but did broadcast his nearly universal view that
the results were not convincing. What the physics community learned of research
in the cold fusion ﬁeld in general came through Morrison’s ﬁlter.

Skeptics have often said that negative papers are not allowed at the conference.
At ICCF10, some eﬀort was made to encourage skeptics to attend. Gene Mallove
posted more than 100 conference posters around MIT several months prior to the
conference (some of which remain posted two years later), in the hope that people
from MIT would come to the conference and see what was happening. No MIT
students or faculty attended, outside of those presenting at the conference. The
cold fusion demonstrations presented at MIT were likewise ignored by the MIT
community.

Figure 4.
US oil production and petroleum consumption.

To encourage skeptics to attend, invitations were issued to Robert Park, Peter
Zimmermann, Frank Close, Steve Koonin, John Holzrichter, and others. All de-
clined, or else did not respond. In the case of Peter Zimmermann, ﬁnancial issues
initially prevented his acceptance, following which full support (travel, lodging, and
registration) was oﬀered. Unfortunately his schedule then did not permit his par-
ticipation. Henceforth, let it be known that it was the policy at ICCF10 to actively
encourage the participation of skeptics, and that many such skeptics chose not to
participate.


10. Energy Issues

There has been concern about the world-wide energy supply for some time, speciﬁ-
cally in the area of oil production. It was suggested in the 1950s by M. King Hubbert
that oil production in the US would peak once the available oil was depleted by half,
which Hubbert calculated should occur around 1970. This suggestion was not ini-
tially well-received. One can see in Figure 4 the history of U.S. oil production, which
in fact peaked in 1970 and has subsequently fallen. In the simplest interpretation
of this, it becomes increasingly expensive to remove oil from deposits the more they
become depleted. Also shown in Figure 4 is the total U.S. petroleum consumption,
which shows that there is plenty of demand but not enough oil production to meet
this demand. At present the U.S. imports signiﬁcant amounts of oil to meet the
demand.

Figure 5.
World oil production.

It is expected that oil production world-wide will peak once the available oil
is depleted by half, and there is considerable discussion at present as to precisely
when this will occur. From the data shown in Figure 5, it appears that this had not
happened as of 2004. There exist projections as to when this will occur which range
between 2005 and 2020. When world-wide oil production falls short of world-wide
demand, then the laws of economics dictate that the price will begin to rise. As the
demand for oil internationally continues to increase at the rate of a few per cent
per year, it is only a matter of time before the price begins to rise. The recent
price history is shown in Figure 6. For many before 1970, the price in constant
value dollars was relatively constant. In the 1970s and 1980s, prices rose due to
artiﬁcial constraints put on the supply by oil producers. There is concern that the
most recent price increases may be due to an inability of production to keep up
with demand.

Figure 6.
Oil price per barrel.
Price in US dollars (bottom); price in constant value dollars
referenced to 2005 (top). Prices are given yearly up to 2003, and monthly starting in 2004.

From this discussion it is apparent that the world faces tough problems in the
area of energy supply, speciﬁcally in the area of oil. Some of those working on
excess heat production have wondered why there is not more interest in cold fusion
research, especially since laboratory results appear to indicate that energy is being
produced, that it has a nuclear origin, and that it is clean.


11. DoE review

One of the reasons that research in the cold fusion ﬁeld does not attract more
interest is because of the events of 1989. Following the initial announcements in
March 1989, there was great interest for a while. However, initial eﬀorts to replicate
the experiments were generally not successful, and no one had a good explanation
why there should be any eﬀects at all.

The Department of Energy conducted a review of cold fusion in 1989. There were
ﬁve conclusions of this review: that the claims of excess heat were not convincing;
that the excess heat was not shown to be associated with a nuclear process; that
the neutron emission reported was not persuasive; that there was no reason based
on what was known about nuclear and solid-state physics to expect such eﬀects;
and that the eﬀects claimed would require the invention of a new physical process
diﬀerent from what had been studied in nuclear physics. Many in the scientiﬁc
community came away with the opinion that the DoE review had shown conclusively
that there was nothing to any of the claims, hence nothing to have any interest in.
Huizenga, a co-chair of the review panel, discussed the review and his perspective
on it in Cold fusion, the scientiﬁc ﬁasco of the century.

Now, it is one thing for the 1989 work to appear to a hard-nosed review panel
to be less than convincing, and quite another for there to be no new eﬀects. For
example, a perusal of the pages that follow stand witness to some of what people
in the ﬁeld have done and seen recently.

ICCF10 was considered to be very strong scientiﬁcally by many who attended.
Following this, there was much discussion about re-engaging the scientiﬁc commu-
nity, since it was felt that the results were strong enough so that the ﬁeld should
rejoin with mainstream science. One of the suggestions that was made concerned
requesting a new review of cold fusion from the Department of Energy, in the hope
that some of the damage done in 1989 might be rectiﬁed. In the Fall, 2003, following
ICCF10, we requested a new review of cold fusion. Discussions were held at DoE,
during which it was proposed that members of the cold fusion community might
work with DoE to assist in a review of the ﬁeld, with the focus on excess energy
production. Some months later, it was announced that DoE would conduct a new
review of cold fusion.

We proposed a review that would focus on energy production, as this had been
most studied within the ﬁeld, and as discussed above is potentially important given
the tough energy problems that the U.S. and the rest of the world faces. We also
proposed to cover material that was most solid within the ﬁeld in the sense that
more than one group had been involved, that we were familiar with, and that there
had been time to think about the results.

The DoE charge to the reviewers included three tasks:
(1) Examine and evaluate the experimental evidences for the occurences of nuclear
reactions in condensed matter at low energies (less than a few electron volts).
(2) Determine whether the evidence is suﬃciently conclusive to demonstrate that such
nuclear reactions occur.
(3) Determine whether there is a scientiﬁc case for continued eﬀorts in these studies
and, if so, identify the most promising areas to be pursued.

In essence, we had proposed to make the case that the experimental evidence sup-
ported the existence of an excess heat eﬀect that merited further study. DoE seemed
more interested in a demonstration of new nuclear reactions. The existence of an
excess heat eﬀect at levels far exceeding any available chemical energy is thought
by many to imply the existence of new nuclear reactions, and this is supported by
observations of 4He that correlated with energy production. However, the charge
to the reviewers implies a focus on speciﬁc new nuclear reactions, for which there is
not consensus among the diﬀerent groups in the ﬁeld at present, and hence was not
part of the primary review. Particle emission was discussed as a secondary topic in
the review. Although the evidence seemed strong, there was much criticism of the
measurements, interpretation, and the results in general.

DoE requested a 15 page summary, and proposed that a few oral presentations
be given during a one day session (which was held in August, 2004). The review
document that we submitted will appear in the ICCF11 proceedings. The conclu-
sions of the DoE review were posted by DoE, and the speciﬁc comments of the
reviewers were made available.

Given the very skeptical attitude that prevails among the scientiﬁc community,
and that also was reﬂected initially among the majority of the reviewers, it would
have been an easy matter for them to conclude simply that: “the evidence does not
demonstrate that a new eﬀect is occuring,” and that they “do not see a scientiﬁc
case for continuing these studies under federal sponsorship,” as was written by one
of the referees. However, this was not what happened. Instead, the DoE summary
tells us:
“The nearly unanimous opinion of the reviewers was that funding agencies
should entertain individual, well-designed proposals for experiments that ad-
dress speciﬁc scientiﬁc issues relevant to the question of whether or not there is
anomalous energy production in Pd/D systems, or whether or not D-D fusion
reactions occur at energies on the order of a few eV.”
The reviewers also indicated two areas that could be helpful in resolving some of
the controversies in the ﬁeld:
(1) materials science aspects of deuterated materials using modern characterization
techniques;
(2) the study of particles reportedly emitted from deuterated foils using state-of-the-art
apparatus and methods.
Many more issues were discussed by the reviewers, and in the review summary,
which are posted on the LENR-CANR website, and readers are encouraged to look
them over.

In regard to the question of whether there is an excess heat eﬀect, which was a
major point under discussion, the summary document provided by DoE said:
“The excess power observed in some experiments is reported to be beyond
that attributable to ordinary chemical or solid state source; this excess power
is attributed by proponents to nuclear fusion reactions. Evaluations by the
reviewers ranged from: 1) the evidence for excess power is compelling, to 2)
there is no convincing evidence that excess power is produced when integrated
over the life of an experiment. The reviwers were split approximately evenly
on this topic.
The reviewers who accepted the production of excess power
typically suggest that this eﬀect is seen often, and under some understood
conditions, is compelling. The reviewers who did not ﬁnd the production of
excess power convincing cite a number of issues including: excess power in the
short term is not the same as net energy production over the entire time of
the experiment; all possible chemical and solid state causes of excess heat have
not been investigated and eliminated as an explanation; and the production of
power over a period of time is a few per cent of the external power external
power applied and hence calibration and systematic eﬀects could account for
the purported net eﬀect. Most reviewers, including those who accepted the
evidence and those who did not, stated that the eﬀects are not repeatable, the
magnitude of the eﬀect has not increased in over a decade, and that many of
the experiments are not well documented.

Many of these issues were stated clearly in the review document, and discussed
at length in the oral presentations, and it is hard to understand why they are
even issues any longer.
The amount of energy under consideration is so great
that even if it were somehow stored, the resulting energy storage density greatly
exceeds any chemical or solid state capability. Power excesses well in excess of a
few per cent were presented and discussed. With respect to the last point about
reproducibility and magnitude, these conclusions are not consistent with what was
presented. Reproducibility has improved, and the ratio of output power to input
power has been increasing over the years, as we presented.
We continue to be
haunted by the ghosts of 1989.

The 2004 DoE review did not produce the deﬁnitive vindication that some had
hoped for. But there have been a number of tangible results:
(1) In the review process, we met a harsh panel of reviewers, who expected to make
short work of poor science.
Instead, when they were presented with research
results, attitudes began to change in several cases.
(2) It is now possible to get cold fusion research funded in the U.S. – some very
skeptical reviewers have recommended that strong proposals in the ﬁeld be funded,
and we should take advantage of this.
(3) There are cold fusion papers that are being considered for publication in more
mainstream journals, and some have now appeared in print.
(4) There is increased interest in the area on the part of the scientiﬁc community, as
measured by the large number of papers being downloaded from the LENR-CANR
website, and by the larger audiences that attend presentations in the ﬁeld.
(5) Commercial opportunities have increased, as measured by the number of new
commercial ventures that are working in the area.

After many years, the situation is beginning to improve. With our continued eﬀorts,
we can and we will accomplish more.


12. Gene Mallove

We note with great regret the passing of our friend Gene Mallove on May 14, 2004.
Gene (shown in Figure 7) was an early enthusiast and advocate of all things cold
fusion from the beginning of the ﬁeld, and subsequently became an advocate for
many people and causes who had been cast out of the mainstream of the scientiﬁc
community. He wrote Fire from Ice, which provided a clear account of the events
surrounding and following the 1989 announcements of Jones, and of Fleischmann
and Pons. He started Inﬁnite Energy magazine, which provided a forum in which
those with nontraditional ideas and opinions could have their say. Although we have
often not agreed with Gene’s views and opinions, to honor Gene we have provided
a place for his contribution so that he may have his say.


Figure 7.
Gene Mallove. Photograph provided courtesy of Mitchell Swartz.

Peter L. Hagelstein
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA
September, 2005
