Fleischmann-Pons-type cold fusion cell shown with a small loading power supply attached. The palladium cathode 
is inside the coiled-wire anode in the cell. The assembly is immersed in lithium deuteroxide (heavy water) solution. 

Dennis Letts constructed this cell for testing at EarthTech laboratory. Photos taken courtesy of Mr. Letts, February 
2006, at EarthTech International, Inc. of Austin, Texas. (See Appendix A for more information.)  
Dennis Letts, cold fusion researcher, with calorimeter assembly. The calorimeter containing the cold fusion cell is 
the insulated box – to the right of Dennis – inside the wooden environmental control chamber. Calorimeter was 
designed and built by Scott Little and George Luce of EarthTech International, Inc. Photo was taken February 2006 
at EarthTech laboratory.  

Frontispiece.  

Cold Fusion Cell and Calorimeter  
Preface 
Cold fusion burst upon the scene in 1989 as a major scientific breakthrough with enormous 
promise as a source of unlimited and virtually free energy to meet society’s needs. In the ensuing 
weeks tremendous fervor in the scientific and political arenas at first gradually and then rather 
suddenly gave way to disillusion, marginalization and even ridicule. By early 1990 most 
“mainstream” scientists became convinced that the phenomenon did not exist, and politicians 
and the public generally followed suit. Since then nearly everyone, including scientists and 
energy policymakers, have believed that cold fusion is a dead issue. As recently as January of 
this year, cold fusion was brought up in the context of scientific missteps or fraud1 
However, a relatively small group of reputable scientists has continued to conduct research and 
develop theories for what they believe to be a “real” phenomenon of cold fusion. Continued 
promising experimental results in the 16 years since cold fusion was “debunked” has inspired 
these dedicated few to continue their efforts in spite of being marginalized and even experiencing 
damage to their careers in some cases. Cold fusion research since 1989 has been characterized2 
as “undead science” – neither fully alive as part of mainstream scientific research nor fully dead, 
like N rays, polywater and other phenomena once widely embraced but now fully discredited.  

Examination of the record on cold fusion indicates an urgent need for a re-evaluation under a 
broader context than has previously been accomplished. It appears likely that past evaluations 
have been fraught with mistakes, have been performed by the wrong experts, have led to 
erroneous conclusions about cold fusion, and have most probably deprived humankind of a new 
scientific field – at the least – and perhaps also a new source of cheap unlimited energy.  

What should be done regarding research in cold fusion in the future?  

This question is particularly well suited to be addressed by a rigorous policy analysis3,4. A 
Conference Course in Policy Analysis has therefore been accomplished with the objectives of 
“making the case” for a policy analysis of cold fusion research, developing the needed 
background information, and establishing the framework for conducting the analysis. 

Specifically, the Conference Course includes five work products: 


1 Kevles, Bettann, H. “When Fraud Wriggles Itself into Science”. Austin American-Statesman (January 15, 2006), p. 


H1, H4. 


2 Simon, Bart. Undead Science: Science Studies and the Afterlife of Cold Fusion. New Brunswick, New Jersey: 

Rutgers University Press, 2002. 


3 Anderson, James. Public Policymaking – an Introduction. Boston, Massachusetts: Houghton Mifflin Co., 2006. 

4 Birkland, Thomas. An Introduction to the Policy Process – Theories, Concepts, and Models of Public Policy 

Making. Armonk, New York: M.E. Sharpe, 2001. 
• 
Position Paper. Documents the rationale for a policy analysis study and sets the stage for 
conducting the study. 
• 
Electronic Presentation. Summary of Conference Course findings, recommendations, and 
proposal for the cold fusion policy analysis study (in Microsoft PowerPoint). 
• 
Cold Fusion Policy Research Proposal. Lays out the scope of the policy analysis study 
along with the proposed methodology, budget and schedule, as the basis for funding the 
study. 
• 
Annotated Bibliography and Website Review. Includes the most significant resources 
regarding the history, development, technical basis, and current status of cold fusion. 
• 
Hard Copy and Electronic File Library. Contains the principal published and unpublished 
resources considered in the annotated bibliography and website review for future 
reference in a policy analysis study. 

This Position Paper is the primary work product. The library and the annotated bibliography and 
website review were developed as preparation for this Paper, and the presentation and proposal 
flow from the findings and recommendations of the Paper. These work products are provided in 
Attachments 1 to 4. 


1. Introduction 

Cold fusion may, or may not, be real. Seventeen years have elapsed since it was announced in a 
press conference at the University of Utah by Dr. Stanley Pons and Dr. Martin Fleischmann on 
March 23, 19895. Primarily because of difficulties in reproducibility of the phenomenon, and the 
absence of expected nuclear byproducts of the energy production (based on hot fusion research), 
it was quickly – within a few months – deemed to be nonexistent by mainstream science. 

Continued promising results of research by a few reputable scientists, however, has kept the 
“dream” of cold fusion alive.  

The value of fusion-derived energy for improving the human condition has long been recognized 
as a matter of public policy, as demonstrated by the more than $15 billion of expenditures on hot 
fusion research over the past 50 years. Given the dismal results of this effort and expenditure in 
actual realization of the hoped-for benefit, it is not surprising that another potential source with 
equal or better promise of success, and with a higher quality and desirability of the associated 
technology, are receiving the attention of energy policy makers. 

It is the position of this paper that a re-evaluation of cold fusion is urgently needed for three 
primary reasons:  
• 
• 
• 
Mistakes that were made in the months after it was announced, leading to a premature 
and probably erroneous judgment;  
The continuing observation of the generation of “excess heat” by many researchers in 
many settings in the 16+ years since it was marginalized; and  
The obvious and major importance of the phenomenon to the future of humankind. 

A re-evaluation is needed even if the probability of the reality of cold fusion is low, which is not 
the case, as indicated by continued research since 1990. In other words, the phenomenon of cold 
fusion is too important to humankind to be allowed to languish without a full analysis in a public 
policy context of whether it should receive research and development support. 

Objectives and Approach 
The objectives of this paper are to: 1) develop the case that cold fusion, although currently highly 
marginalized, is nevertheless potentially significant enough to warrant a rigorous policy analysis 
study; 2) outline candidate policy alternatives for fiscal and other support of cold fusion research; 
and 3) set the stage for performing a full-blown policy analysis study of the necessity and 
reasonableness of supporting cold fusion in the future. 


5 Huizenga, John R. Cold Fusion: the Scientific Fiasco of the Century. Rochester, New York: University of 

Rochester Press, 1992, Appendix I, p. 289. 

In this paper, the phenomenon of cold fusion is first summarized in the context of nuclear energy 
as a whole and in relation to “hot fusion” or “normal fusion” specifically. The history of cold 
fusion is then described in two phases, first the initial announcement, flurry of research, and 
eventual discrediting by mainstream science, and second the marginalized research conducted in 
the years since. A project of rigorous policy analysis research is then outlined, including a 
several scenarios of support and associated policy approaches. Finally, a proposal for policy 
analysis of cold fusion is developed to further enhance prospects for this important phenomenon. 

Terminology 
Recent research in the area of cold fusion has found that the processes involved are quite 
complex and include a number of phenomena besides fusion, such as transmutation of elements. 

Researchers have concluded that the term “cold fusion” has therefore become obsolete and are 
now favoring “condensed matter nuclear science” (CMNS)6. Other terms used for the 
phenomenon are “low-energy nuclear reactions” (LENR) and “chemically assisted nuclear 
reactions” (CANR). 

It is undoubtedly true that at least part of the driving force for a name change is to avoid or 
reduce the stigma that has become attached to the term “cold fusion”. However, cold fusion is 
used in this paper because of its broad familiarity and to address “head on” the issues around the 
phenomenon through a policy analysis perspective. Thus the term is used broadly to refer to both 
the specific processes of hydrogen fusion to helium at normal (“room”) temperatures and the 
broader associated chemical and nuclear phenomena. 

Literature and Website Review 
In preparation for this paper, the principal resources on cold fusion were identified, collected and 
reviewed. These resources include both hard copy and electronic files and are from published 
and unpublished sources at libraries and on the Internet (including websites dedicated to the 
subject of cold fusion). The library of resources assembled to support this paper (and a possible 
future policy analysis project) is described in Attachment 4. 

An Annotated Bibliography for the books and articles was prepared for the identified resources 
(see Attachment 3). Each annotation includes the table of contents and a summary of the 
principal findings, points of view, recommendations and potential usefulness for policy analysis. 

Most of the readily available non-technical sources were included in the review, many of them 
informally published (not peer reviewed) because of the marginalized status of cold fusion in 
mainstream science. An attempt was made in the Annotated Bibliography to provide balanced 
coverage of the points of view and positions of both the proponents and skeptics. Cold fusion 
proponents must fully understand the reasons and viewpoints of the opponents if they are to be 
effective in developing counter-arguments and conducting research that fully addresses the 
issues raised by the skeptics. 


6 Biberian, Jean Paul, Editor-in-Chief. International Society for Condensed Matter Nuclear Science. Online. 


Available: http://www.iscmns.org. Accessed: January 2006. 

One of the salient characteristics of cold fusion as a highly marginalized science is the denial of 
access to normal scientific publication channels for reporting research results. The availability of 
the Internet has consequently proven to be a powerful communications tool both for exchange of 
technical information and as a forum for mutual support among researchers and other interested 
parties. Approximately a dozen websites that are partly or totally dedicated to cold fusion 
promotion and information dissemination were reviewed and annotated. 

The bibliographic and website reviews conclude with a high-level interpretation, which asserts 
that there are cogent reasons for conducting a formal policy analysis of cold fusion. A subset of 
the citations in the Annotated Bibliography and Website Review (Attachment 3) are included in 
the References Cited for this paper.  

Why Policy Analysis? 

Past evaluations of cold fusion have been primarily technical in nature and have focused on 
whether the phenomenon actually exists or is “voodoo science”. If the findings of these 
evaluations were conclusive and universally accepted, then the “case would be closed” and cold 
fusion would join the ranks of other debunked phenomena like polywater and N-rays. The reality 
with respect to cold fusion, however, is that many competent researchers believe that the 
phenomenon is real and continue to conduct research and find reproducible evidence for its 
existence. 

One salient fact emerges from all the commotion around the cold fusion controversy – excess 
heat beyond what can be accounted for by chemical reactions is produced, which implies, by 
default, that a nuclear process is involved. As noted by the U.S. Department of Energy panel that 
evaluated cold fusion as early as 19897 (and recommended that no special funding be provided): 
Ordinarily, new scientific discoveries are claimed to be consistent and reproducible; as a result, if the 
experiments are not complicated, the discovery can usually be confirmed or disproved in a few months. The 
claims cold fusion, however, are unusual in that even the strongest proponents of cold fusion assert that the 
experiments, for unknown reasons, are not consistent and reproducible at the present time. However, even a 
single short but valid cold fusion period would be revolutionary (italics added by author). 

Valid observations of excess heat have now been substantiated not in just one, but in many 
experiments performed by different researchers working in numerous laboratory settings and 
using a large variety of methods and equipment. Given this strong evidence and the continuing 
controversy, as well as the importance of cold fusion to society, the decision on whether it should 
be further investigated must transcend purely technical considerations and opinions. 

Furthermore, there is also strong evidence of mistakes, bias and even questionable professional 
conduct on the part of those most responsible for the marginalization of cold fusion in the early 
months. For example, the chairman of the 1989 U.S. Department of Energy panel that 
recommended against support of cold fusion subsequently wrote a book referring to cold fusion 
as the “scientific fiasco of the century” – hardly an unbiased viewpoint for leadership of this 


7 U.S. Department of Energy, Energy Research Advisory Board. “Final Report of the Cold Fusion Panel of the 

Energy Research Advisory Board.” Unpublished U.S. DOE Report, 61 p. November, 1989. 
important panel. In another case, at a professional meeting (of the American Physical Society) in 
1989, a physicist made the statement that “We are suffering from the incompetence and perhaps 
delusions of Drs. Pons and Fleischmann”, both highly credentialed chemists and well respected 
by their peers. It was at this meeting that the tide turned against cold fusion among the 
professional scientific community. This community remains sharply divided between those who 
believe in, or have an open mind about, cold fusion and those who believe adamantly that it is 
not real, based primarily on past knowledge of fusion that is grounded in hot fusion processes.  

Given this dynamic state of affairs and the continuing controversy among the scientists, the 
decision on cold fusion support must be elevated to a higher level and broadened to include other 
experts and methods. The methods, discipline, broad range of participants, and proven 
effectiveness of policy analysis8,9 makes this approach the best available for conducting a re-
evaluation of cold fusion. 
8Anderson, James. Public Policymaking – an Introduction. Boston, Massachusetts: Houghton Mifflin Co., 2006, p. 


9 Birkland, Thomas. An Introduction to the Policy Process – Theories, Concepts, and Models of Public Policy 

Making. Armonk, New York: M.E. Sharpe, 2001, p. 3-21. 


2. Cold Fusion: What Is It, and Why Is It Important? 


Cold fusion, if it is eventually found to be a real phenomenon, promises to be one of the most 
important discoveries in human history10. It would have a profound effect on almost all aspects 
of human existence. Both cold fusion and hot fusion are important to humankind because, if 
successfully developed and commercialized for peaceful purposes, they (either or both) would be 
a source of unlimited and virtually free (at least in terms of the hydrogen feedstock) source of 
energy. The following elementary description has been prepared on the assumption that cold 
fusion is real, which is still a subject of much controversy. 

Cold Fusion and Hot Fusion Overview 
Briefly stated, cold fusion generates energy, primarily in the form of heat, through the fusion of 
hydrogen into helium at ambient (“room”) temperatures. By contrast, “hot fusion” generates heat 
and other forms of energy by fusion of hydrogen atoms to form helium at very high 
temperatures, such as occur within the interior of the sun and other stars11.  

Cold fusion is believed to occur within the space between atoms (or molecules) of a solid 
substance (or near the surface of the solid). Through a process not yet fully understood, the 
natural repulsion of hydrogen nuclei (protons, with a strong positive charge) is overcome, and 
the nuclei are brought close enough together for the nuclear force to take over1213. The individual 
protons then fuse to form the nuclei of helium, which has two protons in its nucleus. 

In hot fusion, the individual protons fuse into the two-proton nuclei of helium as a result of very 
high-speed collisions brought on by extremely high temperatures. In cold fusion, the natural 
repulsion of the protons occurs at low temperature through pressure within the lattice of the solid 
or some other, as yet not understood, process. 

Both cold fusion and hot fusion produce energy because the mass of the helium nuclei formed in 
the fusion is slightly less than the combined mass of the hydrogen nuclei (protons) from which 
they were formed. This difference in mass is converted into energy according to Einstein’s 
famous equation, E=mc2. Because “c” – the speed of light – is a very large number (which 


10 Rothwell, Jed. Cold Fusion and the Future. Published by LENR-CANR, December 2004, p. 42-61. Online. 


Available http://www.lenr-canr.org. Accessed August 2005. 


11 The use of hydrogen and helium here is somewhat oversimplified. In actuality, different forms (isotopes) of each 

are involved, depending on the number of neutral particles, neutrons, that are present in the nuclei of each. 


12 Storms, Edmund. A Student’s Guide to Cold Fusion. LENR-CANR.org. Online. Available http://www.lenr-

canr.org, 2003 Accessed: January 2006. 


13 Krivit, Steven B. and Nadine Winocur. The Rebirth of Cold Fusion: Real Science, Real Hope, Real Energy: Los 

Angeles, California: Pacific Oaks Press, 2004, p. 224. 
becomes very much larger when multiplied by itself, or squared), even a small amount of mass, 
“m”, when converted, yields a great deal of energy, “E”. 

The processes of hot fusion in the interior of the sun and other stars have been understood for 
many years. The first achievement of man-made hot fusion was when the first hydrogen bomb 
was exploded in 1952. Since then, attempts have been made – so far without success – to harness 
hot fusion for constructive, peaceful purposes, in the form of usable energy for power generation 
or other useful purpose14. This failure of development continues in spite of ever larger and more 
expensive equipment and devices as well as the expenditure of more than $15 billion. 

Both cold fusion and hot fusion have experienced major problems in their successful 
development for the benefit of humankind. The development of hot fusion for peaceful purposes 
is limited primarily by technical difficulties in achieving fusion in a controlled, stable and usable 
manner that can be used for power generation. Development of cold fusion, on the other hand, is 
limited by insufficient scientific belief that the phenomenon actually exists, and, therefore, 
inadequate dedication of resources to prove (or disprove) its existence – and then developing it 
as a viable source of energy if it does exist. 

The Cold Fusion Nuclear Reaction 
For both hot fusion and cold fusion, the proton that enters the fusion reaction is accompanied by 
a neutron to form a “deuteron” (D)15. The fusion reactions of deuterons to form other isotopes or 
elements are complex in the case of hot fusion and consist of three “branching ratios”16 
D + D → triton (1.01 MeV) + proton (3.02 MeV) + energy 
D + D → helium-3 (0.82 MeV) + neutron (2.45 MeV) + energy 
D + D → helium-4 + gamma rays (23.77 MeV) 
The first two reactions occur about 50% of the time each, whereas the third reaction occurs only 
0.00001% of the time. All three branching ratios produce high energy nuclear particles or 
radiation that make the reactions deadly to life. 

In the case of cold fusion, the predominant (or only) nuclear reaction appears to be similar to the 
least common branching ratio for hot fusion17: 


14 A similar path of development was achieved for nuclear fission, in which nuclear energy is derived from splitting 

large atomic nuclei rather than fusing small hydrogen nuclei into larger helium nuclei. Fission nuclear bombs were 
dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki in 1945. Nuclear fission in the form of nuclear energy was then developed and 
is used in all nuclear power plants in the world today. 


15 Normal hydrogen has a single proton as its nucleus. When a deuteron (proton plus neutron) forms the nucleus of 

hydrogen, and when the hydrogen combines with oxygen, the result is deuterium or “heavy water”. 


16 Simon, Bart. Undead Science: Science Studies and the Afterlife of Cold Fusion. New Brunswick, New Jersey: 

Rutgers University Press, 2002, p. 48. 

D + D → helium-4 + energy (23.8 MeV) in the form of lattice heat or “phonons” 
The primary difference between the above reaction and the third branching ratio of hot fusion is 
the transfer of energy to the lattice as heat (which may be recovered for useful purposes) rather 
than a high energy gamma ray, which is emitted and escapes without being captured for useful 
applications. 

If this simple and benign reaction proves to be correct for cold fusion, it will explain the absence 
of expected nuclear byproducts of hot fusion – a long-held argument used against cold fusion. 

The benign nature of the reaction – no deadly particle emissions or radiation – will also make 
cold fusion much more “user friendly” for practical applications in the future. 

Potential Importance of Cold Fusion  
Cold fusion is potentially extremely important both as a new field of scientific investigation and 
as a source of cheap, unlimited energy18. At a minimum, if the existence of cold fusion and 
associated phenomena is confirmed, and accepted into mainstream science, an exciting major 
new scientific field will be opened – regardless of potential practical applications19. The ability 
to achieve nuclear fusion at ambient temperatures through chemically assisted processes would 
enable scientists to investigate and develop entire new areas of the natural realm. These areas 
include not just power-generating fusion involving elementary particles and small nuclei 
(protons, helium), but other phenomena as well, including transmutation of elements – a dream 
of chemistry since the days of medieval alchemists. The research possibilities in these areas 
would seem to be almost without limit. 

The implications of cold fusion for the future depend upon its eventual proof of existence and 
how well it lives up to its development potential for practical applications. Once it is fully 
established, cold fusion can be expected to follow the well trodden path of other new discoveries 
as they have been developed into economic production. Particularly if it proves to accomplish 
elemental transmutation as well as power generation, however, the impacts on human welfare 
and the functions of society will be much larger than most previous discoveries and follow-on 
technological developments. Yet to be determined, for example, are the minimum size required 
for power-generating units, the power generation density (power per unit weight of functioning 
units), fueling and maintenance requirements, waste generation and management (including 
waste heat), and many other parameters that will determine potential applications and associated 
capital and operational costs. 


17 Mallove, Eugene F. Fire from Ice: Searching for the Truth Behind the Cold Fusion Furor. New York: John Wiley 

& Sons, 1991, p. 277-279, p. 183. 


18 Peat, F. David. Cold Fusion – the Making of a Scientific Controversy. Chicago: Contemporary Books, 1989, p. 

19 Beaudette, Charles G. Excess Heat: Why Cold Fusion Research Prevailed. 2nd ed. South Bristol, Maine: Oak 

Grove Press, 2002, p. 273-283. 

At the current stage of development in the validity of the cold fusion discovery, it is easy (and 
tempting) to make “blue sky” predictions20 about future applications and impacts. Given the 
technical difficulties experienced in obtaining consistent, reproducible performance of 
experiments, to say that cold fusion has been oversold would be an understatement. This 
tendency for overstatement goes back to the 1989 press conference, in which Fleischmann made 
the statement21, “Our indications are that the discovery will be relatively easy to make into a 
usable technology for generating heat and power, but continued work is needed, first, to 
understand the science and secondly, to determine its value to energy economics”22. On balance, 
however, cold fusion remains a very significant development in “the course of human events”, 
and the promise or potential far exceeds the level of support that it currently receives. 

Nuclear “Magic” 
We humans live in a “chemical” world. The history of the earth and the evolution of life, 
including humans, have been based almost exclusively on chemical processes, which involve the 
electrons of atoms and not their nuclei. While it is true that processes of radioactive decay, which 
are nuclear processes, do occur on the earth, they have not played a significant role in our lives 
or in our history. The closest active nuclear process that has a significant impact on human life is 
the fusion of hydrogen into helium in the far-away sun. 

Because of our chemical heritage and the almost exclusively chemical basis of our existence, we 
have a world view that is based on chemical phenomena. The introduction of nuclear-based 
phenomena into everyday human existence presents an entirely new slate of possibilities and 
paradigms for humans to adjust to23. Nuclear processes are qualitatively different from, and often 
much more powerful than, chemical processes. For example, in the nuclear realm, ultimately 
destructive(thermonuclear) bombs have become a reality unlike any previously present in human 
existence. It may fairly be said that during the 20th century Hiroshima and Nagasaki did more to 
dramatically change human perceptions of reality than did the photos of the earth taken from the 
missions to explore the moon. The elusiveness of hot fusion as a reliable source of energy for 
constructive purposes has no doubt further “mystified” nuclear processes for human experience.  


20 Rothwell, Jed. Cold Fusion and the Future. Published by LENR-CANR, December 2004, p. 42-61. Online. 


Available http://www.lenr-canr.org. Accessed August 2005. 


21 Huizenga, John R. Cold Fusion: the Scientific Fiasco of the Century. Rochester, New York: University of 

Rochester Press, 1992, Appendix I, p. 289. 


22 Cold fusion critics have tended to end the quote at “heat and power”, thus skewing the intent of Fleischmann in 

his statement, which was to make the point that while there is promise, additional study is necessary to prove up on 
the promise. 


23 Mallove, Eugene F. Fire from Ice: Searching for the Truth Behind the Cold Fusion Furor. New York: John Wiley 

& Sons, 1991, p. 277-279. 

It could well be that one of the primary obstacles to cold fusion may be our inability to 
comprehend that it could be possible – that it seems too good to be true24. Our chemical-based 
heritage and perception are challenged by the possibility of obtaining free (or nearly so) energy 
supplies from a nuclear source that does not carry the “penalties” of chemical sources of energy, 
such as energy consumption (it takes a great deal of energy to produce energy), environmental 
degradation, and global warming. It goes against our (chemistry-based) intuitive sense that 
deuterium, a form of water, could – in combination with a metal (palladium) – produce vast 
amounts of energy. To us, water does not “burn” – produce heat – it is used instead to quench 
fires. 

The advent of cold fusion as a source not only of free, unlimited energy, but also the possibility 
of elemental transmutation (the ancient dream of alchemy), may be too much for human culture 
to grasp and embrace without a significant period of adjustment. During this adjustment period, 
the fall-back position seems to be one of rejection because it seems more like magic than 
technological reality. This sort of reaction to new discoveries is not, of course, new in the annals 
of science history. Excellent comparisons have been made25 of cold fusion with the discovery of 
radioactivity as reported by Marie Curie and the 1911 discovery of superconductivity26, which 
took until the late 1980s to explain and then develop into technological applications. 


24 Krivit, Steven B. and Nadine Winocur. The Rebirth of Cold Fusion: Real Science, Real Hope, Real Energy: Los 

Angeles, California: Pacific Oaks Press, 2004, p. 14. 


25 Beaudette, Charles G. Excess Heat: Why Cold Fusion Research Prevailed. 2nd ed. South Bristol, Maine: Oak 

Grove Press, 2002, p 3-4. 


26 Mallove, Eugene F. Fire from Ice: Searching for the Truth Behind the Cold Fusion Furor. New York: John Wiley 

& Sons, 1991, p. 272-273. 


3.  Cold Fusion History 

Although there was a report27,28 in the 1920s on cold-fusion-type experiments29, the modern 
history of the phenomenon began with the March 23, 1989 announcement by Pons and 
Fleischmann. The sequence of events, rather high drama, questionable behaviors on the part of 
both proponents and skeptics, and probable erroneous outcome of cold fusion history to date are 
the subject of the sociology of science (much has already been written on the subject) and are 
outside the scope of this paper. The chronology of events has been well summarized30,31 and is 
provided in Appendix A. The historical highlights are described below in two phases – initial 
announcement through marginalization in 1989, and continued research outside the mainstream 
of science from 1990 through the present. 

The primary reason for summarizing the history here is to establish the necessary context for a 
future policy analysis project. As noted previously, the objective of this Position Paper is in fact 
to provide the basis for re-evaluating cold fusion because of the inappropriate marginalization 
that emerged from its history. 

Announcement, Rejection, and Marginalization: 1989 
During the weeks and months after the March 23 announcement, there was a tremendous 
response in the research community to verify (or refute) the assertions of Fleischmann and 
Pons32,33. Many researchers at laboratories across the U.S. and around the world sought to build 
cold fusion cells of similar design, based on meager information available from the news 
conference and pre-prints of the supporting technical paper, which was not published until 


27 Paneth, Fritz, and Kurt Peters. “On the Transmutation of Hydrogen into Helium.’ Ber. 59, p. 2039 (in German). 

28 Peat, F. David. Cold Fusion – the Making of a Scientific Controversy. Chicago: Contemporary Books, 1989, p. 

29 However, experimental findings of helium produced were subsequently found to be the result of contamination of 

glassware, and the findings were subsequently retracted. No further pursuit of the phenomenon or experimental 
findings were apparently subsequently published. 


30 Huizenga, John R. Cold Fusion: the Scientific Fiasco of the Century. Rochester, New York: University of 

Rochester Press, 1992, Appendix III, p. 294-304. 


31 Beaudette, Charles G. Excess Heat: Why Cold Fusion Research Prevailed. 2nd ed. South Bristol, Maine: Oak 

Grove Press, 2002, Appendix 1, p. 361-365. 


32 Taubes, Gary. Bad Science – the Short Life and Weird Times of Cold Fusion. New York, Random House, 1993, p. 

33 Mallove, Eugene F. Fire from Ice: Searching for the Truth Behind the Cold Fusion Furor. New York: John Wiley 

& Sons, 1991, p. 63-101, 131-187. 

May34. The results of the attempts at verification were decidedly mixed – some researchers 
reported success at achieving excess heat, while others found the expected nuclear byproducts. 

Many were not successful in achieving any results at all. In addition, some initially positive 
results were subsequently retracted because of contamination or experimental error. Based on 
their experience with high-temperature plasma reactions, most hot-fusion physicists were 
skeptical from the outset and were consistently the most critical and outspoken antagonists. 

The “story” of all the events and players during the initial weeks of cold fusion’s life is complex 
and filled with drama. However, three events, all of which occurred before the end of 1989, stand 
out as particularly influential in the ejection of cold fusion from mainstream science. 

News Conference Announcement and Subsequent Publication of Paper. The announcement in a 
public forum prior to publication in a peer-reviewed journal was viewed as improprietary by 
many scientists and set up a negative attitude at the outset35. When the paper appeared several 
weeks later, it was found to be lacking in many details needed to run independent experiments to 
establish reproducibility. Worse, some aspects of the work related to nuclear products was found 
to be erroneous. The claim of excess heat – the main point of the paper – was never challenged 
successfully, however. But this claim was largely ignored by the critics as focus was placed on 
the peripheral problems rather than the true meaning of the paper36. It seems apparent that critics 
were successful in achieving rejection of cold fusion by placing the focus on the problems with 
rather than the pioneering achievements of Pons and Fleischmann. 

American Physical Society Meeting in Baltimore, May 1 to 4, 1989. Through the forums of 
technical sessions and news conferences during this meeting, which was not attended by Pons or 
Fleischmann, several hot-fusion scientists collaborated successfully in calling the existence of 
cold fusion into question37. Many observers felt that questionable tactics, bordering on character 
assassination and professional misconduct, were used to ridicule not only the phenomenon, but 
also the pioneering scientists who discovered and announced it38. In any case, this meeting 
proved to be the turning point in the scientific community from hopeful support to 


34 Fleischmann, M. and Stanley Pons. “Electrochemically Induced Nuclear Fusion of Deuterium.” J. Electroanal. 


Chem., vol. 261, p. 301 and Errata in vol. 263 (1989). 


35 Huizenga, John R. Cold Fusion: the Scientific Fiasco of the Century. Rochester, New York: University of 

Rochester Press, 1992, Appendix III, p. 218-222. 


36 Beaudette, Charles G. Excess Heat: Why Cold Fusion Research Prevailed. 2nd ed. South Bristol, Maine: Oak 

Grove Press, 2002, p. 4-5. 


37 Taubes, Gary. Bad Science – the Short Life and Weird Times of Cold Fusion. New York, Random House, 1993, p. 

38 Beaudette, Charles G. Excess Heat: Why Cold Fusion Research Prevailed. 2nd ed. South Bristol, Maine: Oak 

Grove Press, 2002, p. 59-62. 
marginalization and ridicule. Subsequent mainstream publications have referred to cold fusion as 
“bad science”, “pathological science”, and “voodoo science.”39 
U.S. Department of Energy, Energy Research Advisor Board (ERAB), Cold Fusion Panel 
Report. The Secretary of Energy established the cold fusion panel with the charter to assess the 
status of the phenomenon and make recommendations on whether research funding should be 
made available for its investigation and development. The panel was co-chaired by Norman 
Ramsey and John Huizenga, one of the most outspoken critics of cold fusion. The Panel issued a 
draft report in July and a final report in November 198940. It was widely recognized that 
Huizenga (later the author of “Cold Fusion – the Scientific Fiasco of the Century”) was the 
stronger force of the two chairmen. The Panel’s not-very-surprising recommendation was that 
the U.S. DOE not to provide support for cold fusion research. The Panel report was one of the 
most influential factors in the marginalization of cold fusion4142. 

Undead Science: 1990 to Present 
After its peremptory rejection by mainstream science by the end of 1989, cold fusion was widely 
anticipated to “die a natural death” – joining a number of other discoveries that proved not to be 
so, such as N rays and polywater. From the viewpoint of most scientists, and the public as a 
whole, cold fusion did indeed pass away and lose its interest and attention. However, a relatively 
small number of researchers, most of whom felt they had achieved positive results in their 
attempts at confirmation in 1989 and 1990, continued their work, albeit in a highly marginalized 
way in comparison to previous efforts. The marginalization of cold fusion for the past 16 years 
has been experienced in several different ways, for example: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Inability to obtain funding from normal sources, both government and private sector, 
for energy research 
Refusal of peer-review journals to accept papers for publication, or even to forward 
submitted papers for peer review 
Publication of books and articles characterizing cold fusion as pathological or even 
fraudulent science 
Denial of access to resources of mainstream research organizations and academic 
institutions, including graduate student labor for support of projects 


39 Park, Robert L. Voodoo Science – the Road from Foolishness to Fraud. New York: Oxford University Press, 

40 U.S. Department of Energy, Energy Research Advisory Board. “Final Report of the Cold Fusion Panel of the 

Energy Research Advisory Board.” Unpublished U.S. DOE Report, 61 p. November, 1989. 


41 Huizenga, John R. Cold Fusion: the Scientific Fiasco of the Century. Rochester, New York: University of 

Rochester Press, 1992, p. 218-222 


42 Mallove, Eugene F. Fire from Ice: Searching for the Truth Behind the Cold Fusion Furor. New York: John Wiley 

& Sons, 1991, p. 176-181. 

The status and characteristics of cold fusion research since marginalization in 1989 has been 
insightfully described43 as “undead science” – neither fully alive as an essential part of 
mainstream science nor fully dead, as is the case for fully discredited phenomena such as N rays 
or polywater. Within the U.S. the most active enthusiasts fall generally into two categories – 
researchers who maintain laboratories and build and operate cold fusion experiments, and other 
interested parties who provide support in a variety of ways, such as preparing promotional pieces 
and maintaining websites.  

One of the principal forums for sharing research results in the cold fusion community (besides 
the internet) is the series of International Conferences on Cold Fusion (ICCF), which have been 
held approximately annually and which generally rotate among the U.S. Europe and Russia, and 
the Far East, especially Japan. The first ICCF was held in Salt Lake City in 1990, and the most 
recent was ICCF12 in Yokohama, Japan in November and December 2005. The fitality of the 
field is indicated by the number of papers (48) and posters (38) presented during the six days of 
the conference. ICCF 13 is scheduled to be held in Russia, and ICCF 14 in Washington, D.C. 

Much of the research since 1990 has been to improve reproducibility, detect and measure nuclear 
byproducts, and answer other criticism posed by the skeptics. However, research agendas have 
also extended well beyond answering the critics, and includes elemental transmutation and many 
new experimental concepts for obtaining excess heat from cold fusion type processes. 

Particularly interesting are the observations of “heat after death”44, in which the electrodes in 
cold fusion cells continue to generate heat even after the electrolyte is boiled away and the circuit 
that operates the cell is broken. The observation of excess heat when plain water (rather than 
deuterium) and nickel (rather than palladium) are used in the cold fusion cell may portend the 
possible use of more common and less expensive materials for cells in the future. 

Principal Reasons for Cold Fusion Marginalization 
No single cause, or even a few causes in combination, but many factors conspired together to 
bring about the marginalization of cold fusion and its continued existence as a pariah in the 
scientific community. Chief among these factors are the following: 
Methods of Initial Announcement and Publication. As noted, many scientists were offended by 
the “publication by news conference45” The peer-reviewed publication, when it did finally 
appear several weeks later lacked enough detail to support experiments to verify reproducibility. 

And several aspects of the paper – except for the central feature, excess heat – proved to be 
erroneous, which put the entire paper under a cloud of suspicion. 


43 Simon, Bart. Undead Science: Science Studies and the Afterlife of Cold Fusion. New Brunswick, New Jersey: 

Rutgers University Press, 2002. 


44 Beaudette, Charles G. Excess Heat: Why Cold Fusion Research Prevailed. 2nd ed. South Bristol, Maine: Oak 

Grove Press, 2002, p. 214-217. 


45 Huizenga, John R. Cold Fusion: the Scientific Fiasco of the Century. Rochester, New York: University of 

Rochester Press, 1992, Appendix I, p. 1-12. 

Mistakes Made by Both Proponents and Antagonists. Given the large number of mistakes made 
by cold fusion advocates when it was announced and in the weeks and months that followed, and 
in light of the errors and outright misconduct of the antagonists during the same timeframe46, the 
wonder is that it has as much inability as a scientific phenomenon that it does. Perhaps the 
greatest mistake of all is the inability or refusal of the skeptics to have a more open mind in light 
of the failure of “conventional” views in similar situations so many times in the past and with the 
continuing corroboration of the existence of excess heat in a large variety of circumstances. 

Erratic Reproducibility. Cold fusion remains a relatively poorly understood phenomenon47. The 
details of how it occurs at a microscopic level have not yet been systematically observed, and 
there is still no satisfactory theoretical explanation of the processes at work. In this situation, it is 
not possible to know, let alone control, the variables that determine whether cold fusion will 
occur in a given cell. Without the knowledge of the variables governing the occurrence, or lack 
thereof, of cold fusion, it is impossible to consistently achieve reproducible results. It is, 
however, known to be a much more complex phenomenon than originally thought, and the 
resources required to define and control the governing variables have thus far not been allocated 
to its investigation.  

Understatement of the Compexity of the Phenomenon. The initial model or explanation for cold 
fusion was simple and straightforward – that deuterons dissolved in the metal lattice of palladium 
at high concentrations (load factors) ‘somehow” become involved in fusion reactions to form 
helium-4 and heat that is transferred to the lattice. Unfortunately, this model has proved to be too 
simplistic for the actual cold fusion processes, which appear to take place near the surface of the 
solid, involve complex chemical compounds rather than just palladium, and occur when 
conditions are right – in microscopic volumes for a very short time but repeatedly and very 
quickly in many different places in close proximity to each other48. 

Difficulties in Selection of Control Experiments. One of the main arguments leveled by the 
critics at cold fusion scientists is inadequate experimental procedure as evidenced by the lack of 
control experiments. Proponents counter with the argument that the large magnitude of excess 
heat is prima facie evidence of an experimental result even without the benefit of control 
experiments. Proponents further argue that adequate control experiments – such as plain water in 
place of deuterium or another metal besides palladium – are not available because some cold 
fusion experiments indicate that plain water may be coaxed into acting like deuterium under 
certain conditions, and that other metals (e.g., nickel) may also be implicated in cold fusion 
reactions. 


46 Beaudette, Charles G. Excess Heat: Why Cold Fusion Research Prevailed. 2nd ed. South Bristol, Maine: Oak 

Grove Press, 2002, p. 287-288. 


47 Storms, Edmund. A Student’s Guide to Cold Fusion. LENR-CANR.org. Online. Available http://www.lenr-

canr.org, 2003 Accessed: January 2006. 


48 Storms, Edmund. A Student’s Guide to Cold Fusion. LENR-CANR.org. Online. Available http://www.lenr-

canr.org, 2003 Accessed: January 2006. 

Antagonism of the Hot Fusion Scientist Community. From the outset the plasma physicists 
collectively had deep misgivings about the reality of cold fusion based on their understanding of 
nuclear processes at very high temperatures (hotter than the interior of the sun). In particular, 
they insisted that the evidence or fusion be based not on the excess heat observed, but on the 
nuclear byproducts that would be expected as if the fusion were occurring in a plasma 
environment. As noted, cold fusion appears to occur through fusion of two deuterons to form 
helium-4 (which occurs in only 0.05% of fusion reactions in plasmas), and since heat (phonons) 
are generated rather than a gamma ray, the hot fusion scientists do not believe the reaction 
actually occurs. Inasmuch as plasma physicists have tremendous power and influence in the 
scientific community, their adverse reactions and behavior proved fatal to the acceptance of cold 
fusion into mainstream science49. 

Incorrect Interpretation as Pathological Science. One of the main points of the sociology of 
science is that what gets accepted as science, or rejected as non-science, depend as much (or 
more) upon who “gets to decide” as it does upon the truth50. One of the key publications for this 
“boundary work” was the delineation of criteria indicating pathological science51. Critics of cold 
fusion have attempted to apply the Langmuir criteria52 to cold fusion in order to characterize it as 
pathological science. Cold fusion advocates, however, have effectively countered the application 
of the Langmuir to cold fusion. 

Failure of the Scientific Process. Observers of the sociology of the events around the 
announcement and subsequent history of cold fusion, in consideration of the above observations, 
suggest that the whole scientific process has been compromised53. The process was flawed, and 
the outcome erroneous. The continued polarization of views, and the dogged refusal of 
mainstream scientists to consider the evidence with an open mind, suggest that this view of the 
compromised status of objective views in this case may well be correct. 

Recap of the Current Situation 
Cold fusion has experienced a difficult birthing process. Many mistakes were made at the time of 
its discovery and announcement, and many more mistakes – some bordering on professional 
misconduct – were made as it was being evaluated in the initial weeks after announcement. The 
result was a premature and inappropriate ejection of the phenomenon from mainstream science. 


49 Beaudette, Charles G. Excess Heat: Why Cold Fusion Research Prevailed. 2nd ed. South Bristol, Maine: Oak 

Grove Press, 2002, p. 59-62. 


50 Simon, Bart. Undead Science: Science Studies and the Afterlife of Cold Fusion. New Brunswick, New Jersey: 

Rutgers University Press, 2002. 


51 Park, Robert L. Voodoo Science – the Road from Foolishness to Fraud. New York: Oxford University Press, 

2000, p. 40-43. 


52 Langmuir, Irving. “Pathological Science.” Physics Today, vol 42 (October 1989), p. 44. 

53 Beaudette, Charles G. Excess Heat: Why Cold Fusion Research Prevailed. 2nd ed. South Bristol, Maine: Oak 

Grove Press, 2002, p. 337-354. 

Were it not for the dedicated efforts of a few competent researchers, who have continued to 
achieve positive experimental results, cold fusion would have been relegated to the dustbin of 
discredited phenomena 17 years ago. The positive results achieved during the years of 
marginalization, coupled with the urgent need of society for alternate sources of energy besides 
the dwindling and polluting fossil energy sources, demand that cold fusion be given a serious re-
evaluation.  

Cold fusion has a long way to go to regain its standing in the scientific community and in the 
eyes of the general public. It has repeatedly been (and continues to be) held up as a premier 
example of bad, fraudulent, or voodoo science – the (greatest) fiasco of the (20th) century. But 
given the potential payoff to society (even if the probability were low, which it appears not to be) 
makes the effort not only worthwhile, but urgently necessary. 

Who, really, is qualified to say definitively that cold fusion does not occur or is not based on as-
yet poorly understood processes? If “excess” heat – beyond what can be accounted for by 
chemical processes – is generated in cold fusion (which is the best-established proof” of the 
phenomenon), diligent research should – must – be performed to discover its source. As pointed 
out by Ramsay54, even just “a single short but valid cold fusion period would be revolutionary”. 

Such a single observation of heat in an apparatus at room temperature should call forth 
immediate and massive efforts to discover the materials and conditions that produce the 
phenomenon, given the significance to human welfare. There appear to have been not just one, 
but hundreds, of experiments that have successfully generated such excess heat in the past 17 
years. 

The question at this juncture is clearly, “What’s next for cold fusion?” 


54 Beaudette, Charles G. Excess Heat: Why Cold Fusion Research Prevailed. 2nd ed. South Bristol, Maine: Oak 

Grove Press, 2002, p. 129-133. 


4. What Should Be Done About Cold Fusion in the Future? 


A rigorous, well-balanced policy analysis is clearly called for in the case of cold fusion. 

Decision-making methods and outcomes in the past have been completely inadequate to the task, 
given the potential importance of cold fusion to human welfare, the continuing promising 
research results even in a marginalized research setting, and the mistakes made by both 
advocates and opponents when cold fusion was first introduced and in the years since.  

Despite the fact that it has gotten deeply buried by a host of adverse events and potential outright 
conspiracy or unprofessional conduct, it must be re-evaluated. The stakes are too high not to give 
cold fusion every possible chance to be proven real. Furthermore, the accumulating evidence for 
its having a basis in reality in the past 17 years of marginalized research is too strong not to give 
cold fusion a broader and fairer hearing.  

The re-evaluation must improve upon the two cold fusion evaluations performed previously by 
the U.S. Department of Energy in 198955 and 200456. Past evaluations have been too narrowly 
focused, have been performed by scientists having a too-limited perspective, and have led to 
erroneous conclusions regarding the potential existence of cold fusion and the appropriate level 
of funding and other support that it should be given. 

Even the most avid skeptics of cold fusion will admit that the history of science is replete with 
instances where discoveries were initially rejected based on then-current paradigms and were 
ultimately exonerated and recognized as being valid57. Some of the greatest leaps forward in 
science have in fact occurred when science was confronted with challenging new discoveries and 
was “forced” to respond with revised ideas, paradigms and methods. Much of the skepticism 
concerning cold fusion comes from researchers whose understanding of nuclear science comes 
from investigation of high-temperature fusion, whose processes may or may not be totally 
relevant to cold fusion phenomena.  

Policy Analysis Approach to Cold Fusion Re-evaluation 
Given the potential social significance of cold fusion (should it eventually be proven to exist), 
the choice of how much to support it is as much (or more) a public policy question as it is a 
scientific or technical question. Scientific considerations must, of course, play a prominent or 


55 U.S. Department of Energy, Energy Research Advisory Board. “Final Report of the Cold Fusion Panel of the 

Energy Research Advisory Board.” Unpublished U.S. DOE Report, 61 p. November, 1989. 


56 U.S. Department of Energy. “Report of the Review of Low Energy Nuclear Reactions”. Unpublished U.S. DOE 

Report, 5 p. December 1, 2004. 


57 In fact, given this ready recognition, the strength of cold fusion opposition from some quarters seems peculiar and 

difficult to comprehend. The extent of closed-mindedness seems remarkable among prominent and knowledgeable 
researchers. 
preeminent role in the decision, but they must be balanced with other cogent social and ethical 
criteria. The question then becomes: “If a potential and hugely beneficial discovery such as cold 
fusion is made, and if current scientific paradigms and methods do not support the discovery, 
how does public policy-making respond?” As noted in Section 1.0, policy analysis provides the 
needed framework and method for a broad-based and more relevant evaluation of cold fusion 
than has been accomplished previously58. 

Current and recent writings on cold fusion are generally quite technical (by active researchers), 
skeptical (by other scientists), sociological (on the rapid rise and fall of cold fusion, and the 
associated reasons), and communications-related (the role of the press in relation to “normal” 
peer-review methods of scientific communication). It appears that a balanced, systematic and 
rigorous policy analysis has not yet been performed on cold fusion.  

The first step of a cold fusion policy analysis would be to construct various scenarios of level of 
support. The second step would be to carefully select a panel or committee of those most 
qualified to conduct the evaluation. To avoid the errors of past evaluations, representation on the 
panel must be extended beyond those qualified only to make technical judgments of cold fusion 
and must include “new blood” that is not biased by the past history. The criteria for evaluation 
would then be defined and carefully articulated so that the panel would have clear guidance on 
how to perform the evaluation. Based on these criteria, the panel would perform the evaluation 
of the alternatives, which would then result in a set of findings and recommendations. The final 
step would be to implement the panel recommendations through revisions, as required, to current 
public policy regarding cold fusion research and development. 

Policy Alternatives for Research Support  
Effective analysis of public policy toward cold fusion begins with a clear statement of the 
available policy alternatives59. It appears that there are four basic alternatives for cold fusion 
support, stated below in summary form: 
Business as Usual. Continue the current de facto policy of “binding” researchers 
through denial of funding, refusal to publish peer-reviewed papers, stigmatization 
with “pathological science” accusations, career thwarting measures, etc. 
• 
Discontinue Research. Give up any hope of investigating and developing cold fusion 
as a source of energy. Allow (or push) it down the annihilation path of N rays, 
polywater, and similar debunked scientific phenomena. 
• 
Confer Scientific Legitimacy. Accept the results, erratic and confusing though they 
may be (not atypical of newly discovered and poorly understood phenomena), of 
• 


58 Anderson, James. Public Policymaking – an Introduction. Boston, Massachusetts: Houghton Mifflin Co., 2006, p. 

59 Ibid, p. 103-105. 

research performed to date under marginalized conditions. Use these results as a 
platform for a comprehensive and well-funded research program on a par with, say, 
hot fusion, or comparable energy research programs. 
“Manhattan Project” Level of Support. Accept the true social implications of cold 
fusion and the promising research results to date. Develop and conduct a massive, 
worldwide research program in an accelerated manner as though it were on a wartime 
basis. 
• 
Clearly, these four basic alternatives could be divided into subcategories to allow greater 
precision in the analysis. 

Broad-based Qualifications of Evaluation Panel 
It has been argued previously in this paper that the cold fusion policy decision-makers of the past 
have been too few in number, too scientifically and technically focused, too biased in their 
viewpoints and judgment, and too narrow in their fields of specialization. Consequently, many 
mistakes have been made in the approach, methods and outcome of previous evaluations, as 
exemplified in both reviews conducted by the U.S. Department of Energy in 1989 and 2004.  

Whereas cold fusion, if it exists, is a natural phenomenon subject to scientific methods, and its 
research and development are technical in nature, policy decisions on its support must be made 
by a more diverse group representing non-technical perspectives than has been called upon 
previously. The evaluation panel should also have representation, for example, of sociologists of 
science, energy policy specialists, political scientists, politicians, commercial development 
experts, and other specialists. 

Criteria for Evaluating Alternatives 
The evaluation panel will be called upon to assist with definition of the appropriate criteria for 
the evaluation. Candidate types of criteria that would be applied during evaluation of the 
alternatives would include extent of previous research and careful (unbiased) assessment of the 
results (as well as the quality of the research), probability of success, cost to achieve the level of 
support, technical feasibility to accomplish, potential benefit to society as a whole and to various 
stakeholders, and infrastructure capacity (including funding sources and competing priorities) to 
implement the alternatives.  

Evaluation of Policy Alternatives 
To the extent possible, the specific methodology for conducting the evaluation of alternatives 
will be selected from previously developed methods, such as multicriteria decision analysis60, for 


60 Anderson, David R., Dennis J. Sweeney, and Thomas A. Williams. An Introduction to Management Science – 

Quantitative Approaches to Decision Making. Mason, Ohio, South-Western, 2003, p. 701-716. 
similar policy analysis situations. Draft solutions for the alternatives, criteria, and evaluation 
methods will be prepared in draft (“strawman”) form, and the evaluation panel will be engaged 
to assist with the final development of all three. The panel will then be convened, and the 
evaluation will be performed using the selected methodology –  as adapted for this evaluation – 
and applying the criteria to the alternatives. The results of the evaluation will then be written up 
as a draft report, which will be finalized after review by members of the evaluation panel. 

Implementation of Policy Analysis Findings 
Implementation of the policy recommendations of the evaluation panel will depend to a large 
extent upon what they turn out to be61. The articulation of the recommendations will likely be 
very important also, given the history and current status of cold fusion, particular with respect to 
the attitudes of mainstream science toward it. 


61 Birkland, Thomas. An Introduction to the Policy Process – Theories, Concepts, and Models of Public Policy 

Making. Armonk, New York: M.E. Sharpe, 2001, p. 177-187. 


5. Setting the Stage for a Cold Fusion Policy Analysis Study 

A research proposal for the policy analysis project outlined in Section 4.0 has been prepared (see 
Attachment 2) and is summarized here. The proposal includes the following parameters for the 
policy analysis project: 
Policy Alternatives. For various levels of support, at a high level, to be subdivided 
into sub-alternatives as needed during the study 
• 
Evaluation Panel Participants. In terms of the types of qualifications and areas of 
expertise. Broad-based definitions, with formalization and selection of individuals in 
the study 
• 
Evaluation Criteria. Specification of the parameters to be used to conduct the 
evaluation of the defined alternatives. 
• 
Methods of Analysis. Analysis methods, tools, and reporting in accordance with 
accepted practices and standards of policy research at the LBJ School of Public 
Affairs 
• 
Management. Utilizing a work breakdown structure approach common to project 
management. Subdivide the work into manageable tasks and monitor progress of each 
against a pre-defined schedule 
• 
The specific scope, organization, management, schedule and budget are summarized below. 

Scope of Analysis 
Eight tasks have been established for the proposed project. The first task is to build upon the 
Conference Course work products (this Position paper and the Attachments 1 to 4) by conducting 
interviews of knowledgeable persons. The literature review will be updated and expanded at the 
same time. Based on the result of these two activities, a Work Plan will be prepared using the 
proposal in Attachment 2 as the point of departure. 

The five policy alternatives for research support set forth in Section 4.2 will then be updated and 
subdivided as required. Members of the Evaluation Panel will be selected, and the criteria for 
evaluation of the alternatives will be finalized. The evaluation methodology, selected during 
preparation of the Work Plan, will be implemented, and the policy analysis will be conducted. 

Based on the results of the analysis, recommendations on the level of research and development 
support for cold fusion will be developed. Similarly, recommendations for the implementation of 
the selected alternative will be prepared. 

Organization and Management 
The policy analysis project will be performed under the supervision of a faculty member at the 
LBJ School of Public Affairs, The University of Texas at Austin. Day-to-0day management will 
be accomplished by a Project Manager (PM) who is a senior graduate student in the program 
leading to a Master of Public Affairs (M.P.Aff.) degree. The work will be accomplished 
primarily by a Project Team consisting of the PM and two to five additional M.P.Aff. graduate 
students. Accepted policy analysis methods and practices at the LBJ School will be used in 
performing the project. Work products prepared by the Evaluation Panel and the Project Team 
will be reviewed and approved by the faculty supervisor. 

Schedule and Budget 
A total of 26 weeks is proposed to complete the policy analysis project for cold fusion. The work 
activities of some of the tasks are set up in an overlapping manner in order to allow telescoping 
of the schedule.  

The proposed budget for the project is $120,000, including about $80,000 for labor, $20,000 for 
travel and other direct costs, and $20,000 for contingency, which is necessary due to the many 
unknown factors associated with the project. 


6. Summary and Recommendations 

Cold fusion holds great promise of potential benefit to mankind as a source of virtually free, 
unlimited energy. Because of mistakes made by both proponents and skeptics of the phenomenon 
in the initial months after its announcement in 1989 and in the years since, it was subjugated and 
marginalized by mainstream science. As a result, public policy toward cold fusion has also been 
one of neglect and lack of support.  

Research under marginalized conditions by a relative small group of reputable scientists 
continues to show promising results, however, particularly in the generation of excess (non-
chemical) heat. Despite the clear record in the history of science of new phenomena initially, and 
erroneously, being rejected based on existing knowledge and paradigms, many mainstream 
researchers continue to reject cold fusion as being “impossible” based on what is known of 
nuclear science.  

In the case of hot fusion, public policy has been supportive because of the promise of cheap, 
unlimited energy – despite the failure of beneficial hot fusion after 50 years of research and 
development, and over $15 billion of expenditure. The failure of public policy support of cold 
fusion, given the promising research results, may constitute a tragedy of national proportions. 

Even one experiment that generates excess heat in an apparatus that operates at room 
temperature should be pursued with as many resources and as much scientific talent as possible, 
and as rapidly as feasible. In the case of cold fusion, hundreds of experiments have definitively 
demonstrated excess heat generation in the past 17 years.  

A new and greatly improved approach to analysis of public policy toward cold fusion – one that 
involves a broader base of experts, that is free of the biases and mistakes of the past, and that 
uses rigorous methods and tools of policy research –  is clearly needed. To do less, given the 
potential importance of cold fusion for human welfare, and the clear indication that energy is 
generated by processes not yet understood, would be to perpetuate the mistakes of the past. And 
it would be to turn away from the possibility of reducing human suffering and of improving the 
human condition worldwide. 


7. References Cited 

1. Anderson, David R., Dennis J. Sweeney, and Thomas A. Williams. An Introduction to 

Management Science – Quantitative Approaches to Decision Making. Mason, Ohio, South-
Western, 2003, p. 701-716. 


2. Anderson, James. Public Policymaking – an Introduction. Boston, Massachusetts: Houghton 

Mifflin Co., 2006. 


3. Beaudette, Charles G. Excess Heat: Why Cold Fusion Research Prevailed. 2nd ed. South 

Bristol, Maine: Oak Grove Press, 2002. 


4. Biberian, Jean Paul, Editor-in-Chief. International Society for Condensed Matter Nuclear 

Science. Online. Available: http://www.iscmns.org. Accessed: January 2006. 


5. Birkland, Thomas. An Introduction to the Policy Process – Theories, Concepts, and Models 

of Public Policy Making. Armonk, New York: M.E. Sharpe, 2001. 


6. Fleischmann, M. and Stanley Pons. “Electrochemically Induced Nuclear Fusion of 

Deuterium.” J. Electroanal. Chem., vol. 261, p. 301 and Errata in vol. 263 (1989). 


7. Huizenga, John R. Cold Fusion: the Scientific Fiasco of the Century. Rochester, New York: 

University of Rochester Press, 1992. 


8. Kevles, Bettann, H. “When Fraud Wriggles Itself into Science”. Austin American-Statesman 

(January 15, 2006), p. H1, H4. 


9. Krivit, Steven B. and Nadine Winocur. The Rebirth of Cold Fusion: Real Science, Real 

Hope, Real Energy: Los Angeles, California: Pacific Oaks Press, 2004, p. 224. 


10. Langmuir, Irving. “Pathological Science.” Physics Today, vol 42 (October 1989), p. 44. 

11. Mallove, Eugene F. Fire from Ice: Searching for the Truth Behind the Cold Fusion Furor. 


New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1991. 


12. Paneth, Fritz, and Kurt Peters. “On the Transmutation of Hydrogen into Helium.’ Ber. 59, p. 

2039 (in German). 

13. Park, Robert L. Voodoo Science – the Road from Foolishness to Fraud. New York: Oxford 

University Press, 2000. 


14. Peat, F. David. Cold Fusion – the Making of a Scientific Controversy. Chicago: 

Contemporary Books, 1989. 


15. Rothwell, Jed. Cold Fusion and the Future. Published by LENR-CANR, December 2004, p. 

42-61. Online. Available http://www.lenr-canr.org. Accessed August 2005. 


16. Simon, Bart. Undead Science: Science Studies and the Afterlife of Cold Fusion. New 

Brunswick, New Jersey: Rutgers University Press, 2002. 


17. Storms, Edmund. A Student’s Guide to Cold Fusion. LENR-CANR.org. Online. Available 

http://www.lenr-canr.org, 2003 Accessed: January 2006. 


18. Taubes, Gary. Bad Science – the Short Life and Weird Times of Cold Fusion. New York, 

Random House, 1993. 


19. U.S. Department of Energy, Energy Research Advisory Board. “Final Report of the Cold 

Fusion Panel of the Energy Research Advisory Board.” Unpublished U.S. DOE Report, 61 
p. November, 1989. 


20. U.S. Department of Energy. “Report of the Review of Low Energy Nuclear Reactions”. 


Unpublished U.S. DOE Report, 5 p. December 1, 2004. 

Appendix A. Frontispiece Information 
The following description of the calorimeter shown in the Frontispiece is from the New 
Energy Times website at the following address: 
http://www.newenergytimes.com/news/NET12.htm#earthtech  
EarthTech International Inc. Announces the "Mother of All Calorimeters" 
[Editor's note: The following text is provided by Scott Little, an experimenter and engineer at EarthTech 
International Inc. Photos of this testing device are on the New Energy Times Web site at 
http://newenergytimes.com/Conversations/LettsPhotos.htm  ]   
EarthTech International announces a new high-accuracy calorimeter at our lab in Austin, Texas. 

Ambitiously dubbed "MOAC" (Mother Of All Calorimeters), this instrument is specifically designed to test 
cold fusion cells operating in the 0-20 watt range.  

A brief description of the system:  
The calorimeter chamber is relatively roomy, and the space available for the cell is a rectangular prism 
volume about 24cm high, 14 cm wide, and 24 cm deep. There are three optical ports which enter the 
chamber. One of these is fitted with a borescope which permits inspection of the cell during calorimetric 
measurements. The other two permit laser beams to be directed at the cell cathode if desired. Provision is 
also made for actuation of a mechanical device near the cell (for example, rotation of magnets around the 
cell) during calorimetric measurements.  

In addition to the device under test, the calorimeter chamber also contains a liquid-to-air heat exchanger 
and a fan which circulates the chamber air across the device under test and through the heat exchanger. 

Thus, the heat evolved by the device under test is coupled to the water flowing through the passages in the 
heat exchanger.  

An active insulation system essentially eliminates heat loss through the walls of the calorimeter chamber. 

Each wall panel consists of a 6mm thick active insulation inner plate, 4 cm of styrofoam insulation, and a 
6mm thick active insulation outer plate. With temperature sensors on both active insulation plates and 
heaters on the outer active insulation plate, each wall panel is independently servo controlled to maintain a 
zero delta-T across the styrofoam insulation.  

Water is circulated around the heat exchange loop by a precision pumping system. An automated batch-
weighing flowmeter regularly monitors the actual water flowrate, which is about 2.2 gm/sec. Three 
independent stages of temperature regulation bring the inlet water to 25.000 degrees C with a typical 
standard deviation of +/- 0.0006 degrees before it enters the calorimeter chamber.  

The calorimeter chamber and the water circulation system are enclosed in a temperature-controlled 
environmental enclosure. This effectively eliminates problems caused by room temperature variations.  

Data collection and experiment control are accomplished with two computers. One is devoted to 
housekeeping activities such as temperature control of the environmental enclosure and the servo control of 
the six active insulation panels. The other computer is responsible for the calorimetry measurements such 
as electrical input power to the device under test, water flowrate measurements, temperatures of the inlet 
and outlet water streams, etc. In all, MOAC monitors 44 analog input channels and operates 15 analog 
output channels to control the system.  

Both of these computers run Labview programs which serve up their front panel images as web pages. This 
permits anyone with Internet access to see what MOAC is doing. In addition, the experiment logbook is 
maintained as a Microsoft Frontpage HTML document which is also served up as a web page so you can 
see what we're trying to do with MOAC.  

All data is recorded to disk and may be replayed by the Labview program to recreate any display obtained 
during a run.  

Accuracy:  
We set out to design a calorimeter that would achieve +/- 0.1 percent accuracy. For example, with 10.000 
watts going into the cell, we wanted MOAC to read between 9.990 and 10.010 watts of heat coming out of 
the cell (assuming no excess heat). MOAC is close to this goal now. However, there are "bad days" when 
MOAC exhibits mysterious shifts of 0.2 or 0.3 percent relative. We are working to resolve these issues 
now.  

Specimen Versatility:  
Because of the total heat collection design of the calorimeter chamber, MOAC exhibits excellent specimen 
versatility. For example, we have a 10-watt calibration resistor permanently mounted inside the calorimeter 
chamber (near the heat exchanger), a control electrolysis cell with H2O-H2SO4 electrolyte, and an 
immersed calibration resistor in that cell. All three of these heat sources read the same in MOAC to within 
+/- 0.1 percent relative.  

Cell Access:  
MOAC's roomy calorimeter chamber will accommodate a variety of cell sizes and shapes. In addition, the 
mechanical actuator feature and optical access ports permit a variety of things to be done to the cell during 
calorimetric measurements.  

Dual Method Calorimetry:  
Because the cell is located in a stirred-air chamber during calorimetric measurements, MOAC performs an 
isoperibolic measurement of the heat evolved from the cell while the water-flow calorimetry is underway. 

The isoperibolic measurement is accomplished by comparing cell temperature to the calorimeter chamber 
air temperature.  

Our Offer:  
Earthtech hereby offers to test promising cells in MOAC free. We believe that the opportunity of observing 
a genuine excess heat effect in an accurate calorimeter is well worth the time, energy, and money we will 
expend in the process. A promising cell is one that typically shows at least 0.20 watts of excess heat and is 
reasonably repeatable. The terms "typically" and "reasonably" are open to interpretation.  

Our goal is to identify cold fusion technology that works, then to help develop it into a useful energy source 
for mankind.  

Scott Little, EarthTech Int'l, Inc. http://www.earthtech.org  
Suite 300, 4030 Braker Lane West, Austin TX 78759, USA  
512-342-2185 (voice), 512-346-3017 (FAX) 
Appendix B. Chronological Summary from Beaudette, 2002 
The following chronology is not meant to be a cold fusion history. It includes primarily those 
items referenced in the text. 

First investigation of hydrogen in metals by Thomas Graham. 

Pierre Curie discovers that radium is always warmer than its environment. 

Paneth and Peters report fusion of hydrogen to make helium. The following year they retract the 
report as mistaken. 

Cohn demonstrates that hydrogen in metals migrates toward the negative terminal. 

Ludwik Fleck published his definitive account of the difficult-to-replicate scientific experiment: 
the Wassermann Test for syphilis. His account is titled, Genesis and Development of a Scientific 
h act. 

Fleischmann awarded Doctorate in Chemistry by the Imperial Collage of the University of 
London.  

Fleischmann accepts Faraday Chair in electrochemistry at Southampton University. 

Fleischmann collects together materials to drive deuterium into palladium very hard. The effort 
is abandoned for lack of time. 

Pons admitted to postgraduate studies at Southampton University. Receives Doctorate two years 
later. 

Pons accepts position in the chemistry department at University of Utah. Fleischmann and Pons 
begin their collaboration 
Fleischmann and Pons plan to try an electrolytic cell experiment to fuse deuterium inside a 
palladium lattice. Electrolyte temperature rise is to be the parameter to watch. 

Fleischmann elected member of the Royal Society of London. 

Winter 
Large release of energy from early cold fusion experiment in laboratory in the north Henry 
Eyring Building at University of Utah. 

Pons appointed a full professor. 1987 
July 
Scientific American magazine published "Cold Nuclear Fusion" by Jones and Rafelski. 

Pons becomes Chairman of the Chemistry Department.  

August 
Two Utah chemists submit proposal to fund their cold fusion studies to the DOE. 

September 
DOE selects S. Jones at Brigham Young University (BYU) to evaluate the proposal. 

Fall 
M. Hawkins, graduate student in the Department of Chemistry, begins experiments with the 
Fleischmann and Pons designed Dewar cell. 

February 
Fleischmann and Pons undertake nuclear measurements to back up excess heat results. 

March 22 
Preliminary Note manuscript received by the journal of Electroanalytical Chemistry. 

March 23 
Press announcement of cold nuclear fusion at the University of Utah. 

April 10 
Publication of the Preliminary Note. 

April 18 
E Scaramuzzi announces the detection of neutron emission from titanium infused with deuterium 
gas and then temperature cycled. 

April 24 
Secretary of Energy Admiral James Watkins forms a panel on cold fusion under joint 
chairmanship of J. Huizenga and N. Ramsey. 

Baltimore 
The American physical Society spring meeting at 
May I 
Baltimore, MD 
4:00 P.M. 

First press conference. Nothing transpires. I There have not :- _ _ - yet been any presentations. 
5:00 p.m. 

Second press conference. N. S. Lewis asserts there is absolutely nothing to the claims of excess 
heat. 
7:00 p.m. 

First special session on cold fusion.  
- Koonin reports no possibility of d-d fusion producing the excess hear and comments on the 
mental and professional status of Fleischmann and Pons 
- N. S. Lewis reports no evidence of heat or nuclear effects from his experiments at Caltech. He 
also reports that Fleischmann and Pons did not obtain excess heat in their experiments in Utah. 

Their faulty results are attributed to a lack of stirring in their cells 
May 2 
10:00 a.m. 

Third press conference (conducted by S. Koonin). 
7:00 p.m. 

Second special session on cold fusion that ended late in the evening. (This was the end of the 
APS special program on cold fusion research.) 
Los Angeles 
American Electrochemical Society meeting session on cold fusion research at Los Angeles, CA 
May 8 
5:00 p.m. 

Session on cold fusion research. N. S. Lewis and M. Fleischmann speak. 
9:00 p.m. 

Fourth press conference: Bockris, Appleby, Fleischmann, and Pons. (N. S. Lewis takes a 
microphone, stands on chair and asks "loaded" questions.) 
May 18 
Petrasso report in Nature shows fatal flaws in Fleischmann and Pons claim to have detected 
neutrons. 

May ?3 
DOE sponsored meeting on cold fusion reports. Santa Fe, NM 
July 12 
Interim report of the DOE Panel. 

August 11 
N. S. Lewis's report published in Nature. 

September 
Oriani submits anomalous power corroboration report to Nature. 

September 15 
Deadline set by the DOE Panel for receipt of reports about cold fusion research. Presumably its 
final report reflects nothing that developed after this date. 

September 24 
New York Times Sunday Magazine published the (:tease and Samios lampoon about 
Fleischmann and Pons and their claims. 

October 16 
EPRI/NSF meeting in Washington. N. S. Lewis hears Fleischmann report on excess heat 
generation and raises no argument about the validity of the work. 

November 11 
Final DOE Panel report issued. 

December 21 
Fleischmann and Pons manuscript of anomalous power measurements received by its publisher, 
the journal of Electroanalytical Chemistry. 

January 
Nature decides to not publish Oriani's confirmation of the anomalous power phenomenon first 
reported by Fleischmann and Pons 
The Wall Street journals Jerry Bishop receives award from the All) for his reporting of cold 
fusion events during 1989 
January 26 
Oriani informed referees do pass his paper for publication, but Washington, DC, editor rejects it.  

March 
First Annual Conference on Cold Fusion 
- Huggins reports 5.6 watts peak power generated 
. - McKubre reports a D/fd threshold effect 
March 
Nature says "farewell" to cold fusion. 

July 25 
Fleischmann and Pons's 56-page seminal paper is published. It describes anomalous power 
generation and its calorimetry. 

Spring 
W Hansen, professor of physics at Utah State University, Logan, prepares an important report for 
the Utah State Fusion/Energy Council supportive of excess heat 
June 
Second ACCF held at Villa Olmo, Como, Italy 
July 
Wilson, et al., publish substantial critique of the Fleischmann and Pons paper of July 1990. 

Fleischmann and Pons's defense is published concurrently 
October 21 
ICCF-3 Nagoya, Japan 
November 
Storms reviews the field to date in an extensive summary article in Fusion Technology (20, 
1991, p. 433). 


1993 December 

Fourth ICCF at Maui, Hawaii.  

More definitive data on D/Pd loading threshold is presented 
Autumn 
The American Scholar publishes article by David Goodstein, "Pariah Science." 
December 
By this time, anomalous power (excess heat) was widely confirmed by replication in many 
independent laboratories using different types of cells and calorimeters.  


1995 Spring 

Dr. Edmund Storms reviews the field to date in the Journal of Scientific Exploration (10, no. 2, 
1996,p. 185). 

Spring 
Dr. G. Preparata published QED Coherence in Matter (World Scientific Int. Publisher, May 
Spring 
Dr. N. Hoffman's book, A Dialogue on Chemically Induced Nuclear E fects, is published. 

April 
Fifth ICCF held in Monaco. 

Attachment 1. Cold Fusion Policy Analysis: Presentation 
Attachment 2. Proposal for Cold Fusion Policy Analysis Project 
Attachment 3. Annotated Bibliography and Website Reviews 
Attachment 4. Library of Resources 
Cold Fusion:
A Cogent Topic for Rigorous Policy Analysis
Thomas W. Grimshaw, Ph.D.

March 2006
Cold Fusion Overview
  Introduced March 1989 at University of Utah
  Intensively studied at numerous laboratories for 
verification
  Dismissed as non-existent by mainstream 
science by end of 1989
  Continued research under marginalized 
conditions, 1990 to present
  Observation of “excess” heat verified in many 
labs, large variety of conditions
  Strong need for re-evaluation under broader 
venue
Conference Course Objectives
  Develop the case for re-evaluation of cold 
fusion
  Propose that evaluation be expanded and 
performed as Policy Analysis
  Outline alternatives for levels of research 
support
  Set the stage for full-blown Policy 
Analyses study
Context of Conference Course
  LBJ School of Public Affairs, The 
University of Texas at Austin
  PA 389, “Conference Course in Policy 
Analysis”
  Dr. Kenneth Flamm, Professor
  Fall 2005 and Spring 2006
Terminology
  “Cold Fusion” has become stigmatized and does 
not encompass all phenomena
  Preferred term is now “CMNS” – Condensed 
Matter Nuclear Science”
  Alternative terms also widely used
o “LENR” – Low-Energy Nuclear Reactions
o “CANR” – Chemically Assisted Nuclear Reactions
  “Cold Fusion” used for Conference Course
o Term is widely recognized (even if negatively)
o Addresses issues head-on 
Conference Course Work Products
  Position Paper
  PowerPoint Presentation
  Proposal for Cold Fusion Policy Analysis
  Annotated Bibliography and Website 
Review
  Library of Resources
Why Policy Analysis?
  Past cold fusion evaluations too narrow and 
inadequate (given cold fusion importance)
  Issue of support and development transcends 
purely technical considerations
  Numerous mistakes by both advocates and 
antagonists led to incorrect outcome
  Continued promising experimental results 
indicating excess heat
  Importance to human welfare necessitates best 
effort possible
What Is Cold Fusion?
  First, what is fusion, generally?
  Fusion of nuclei of hydrogen atoms to form helium 
atoms
  Hydrogen nucleus is one proton and one neutron 
(normal hydrogen has only one proton)
  Heavy isotope called “deuteron” (D)
  Reaction: 2 2H ?  4He
  Mass of 2 2H is slightly greater than 4He
  Difference is expelled as energy according to 
Einstein’s equation:
o E = mc2 
o “c” is a very large number
“Hot Fusion” Reactions
  Occurs inside sun and other stars
  Three nuclear reactions (“branching 
ratios”)
o D + D ?  triton (hydrogen-3) + proton + energy [50%]
o D + D ?  helium-3 + neutron + energy [50%]
o D + D ?  helium-4 + energy (gamma ray) [0.00001%]
  Deadly emissions of nuclear particles and 
gamma radiation
Cold Fusion Nuclear Reaction
  Reaction is similar to very rare reaction of hot 
fusion [0.00001%]
  D + D ?  helium-4 + energy (heat into lattice)
  Benign products – normal helium and heat 
energy
  No deadly gamma rays
  Energy captured as heat in lattice
Cold Fusion Cell: Overview
  Sealed container with deuterium (heavy water) solution
  Electrolytic cell setup with gold anode and palladium (Pd) 
cathode
  Applied voltage causes deuterium to hydrolyze 
(into D & O) and D to enter Pd cathode
  Recombiner (top of cell) causes D & O to re-form into 
deuterium
  Entire assembly is contained in calorimeter to measure 
heat input and output
  Cold fusion reaction occurs when Pd is sufficiently 
“loaded” with deuterium (SOMETIMES)
  “Excess heat” (non-chemical) indicates that cold fusion 
reaction is occurring
Cold Fusion Cell
  Glass container (200 mL)
  Deuterium (heavy water) 
solution
  Anode (coiled wire)
  Cathode (Pd plate inside 
anode)
  Thermistors (temperature)
  Direct current supply
  Recombiner for D & O
(at top)
Why is Cold Fusion Important?
  New field of scientific investigation (at a 
minimum)
  Potential contributor to meeting world 
energy needs
  Reduce dependence on fossil fuels and 
associated drawbacks
o High cost of production
o Environmental damage (e.g., global warming)
o World political liabilities
Nuclear “Magic”
  Humans have a world view based on chemical 
(not nuclear) processes
  Nuclear processes generally much more 
powerful
o For example, thermonuclear bombs
o New to human experience
  Cold fusion barriers to acceptance may be 
caused by its “unbelievable” nature
o “Too good to be true”
o Intuitively, energy cannot come (free) from water and 
a metal
Cold Fusion History: 1989
  Marvh 23 announcement
  Very quick evaluation, rejection, marginalization
  Three major events contributed to “downfall”
o Publication by news conference; subsequent paper was 
weak and contained errors
o American Physical Society meeting; hot fusion scientists 
gained upper hand
o U.S. Department of Energy cold fusion report; recommended 
no special funding
  Beginning of characterization of cold fusion as “bad 
science”, “pathological science”, “voodoo science”
“Undead Science”: 1990 to Present
  Cold fusion marginalized but not defunct (like N-rays, 
polywater)
  Greatly reduced band of researchers continued lab work 
and exchanged results
  Annual International Conference on Cold Fusion“ (ICCF)
  Marginalized conditions
o Inability to obtain conventional funding
o Professional papers refused by peer-reviewed journals
o Books and papers characterizing cold fusion as fraudulent or 
pathological
o Access to mainstream research organizations (e.g., 
academia) denied
o Creativity and labor of graduate students not available
Why Was Cold Fusion Marginalized?
  Method of initial announcement and publication
  Mistakes by both proponents and antagonists
  Erratic reproducibility (variables not understood)
  Understatement of complexity
o Simple model had to be abandoned
o Difficulties in selection of control experiments
  Antagonism of hot fusion physicists
  Incorrect interpretation as pathological science
  Overall failure of the scientific process
What Should Cold Fusion‘s Future Be?
  Policy Analysis – best next step for re-evaluation
  Provides improved methods, setting, participants, 
tools
  Expands venue of evaluation
  Corrects errors of the past
  Provides best possible opportunity to succeed
  Maximizes chances for realization of potential 
benefits of cold fusion 
Research Support Alternatives
  Business As Usual – continue marginali-
zation
  Discontinue Research – abandon cold 
fusion entirely
  Confer Scientific Legitimacy – fund R&D 
along with hot fusion
  “Manhattan Project” – as though on 
wartime footing
Broad-Based Evaluation Panel
  Physicists and other scientists (as before)
  Sociologists of science
  Economists
  Political scientists
  Commercial development specialists
  Politicians
  Select unbiased candidates (if possible)
Scope of Cold Fusion Policy Study
  Eight tasks in Work Breakdown Structure
  Begin with interviews of experts and preparation 
of Work Plan
  Finalize support alternatives and select 
Evaluation Panel
  Develop evaluation criteria and finalize 
methodology
  Conduct Policy Analysis
  Develop recommendations and prepare report
  Organize and manage the project
Organization, Management, Schedule, 
Budget
  Overall supervision by LBJ School faculty 
member
  Project team consisting of graduate students at 
LBJ School
  Evaluation Panel selected from candidates 
nationwide
  Accepted LBJ policy analysis methods and tools 
utilized
  Approximately 26-week project
  Budget of about $120K
Summary
  Cold fusion has great potential benefit to human 
welfare
  Numerous mistakes were made at the outset 
(and subsequently)
  Continued research has verified the phenomena 
(but still lacks underpinnings)
  Policy Analysis is best approach for a fairer and 
broader evaluation
  Framework established in Conference Course for 
“full-blown” Policy Analysis study
Cold Fusion: A Cogent Topic for Rigorous Policy Analysis 
Proposal for Policy Analysis Project 
Presented to: 
Kenneth Flamm, Ph.D., Professor 
PA 389, Conference Course in Policy Analysis 
LBJ School of Public Affairs 
The University of Texas at Austin 
By: 
Thomas W. Grimshaw, Ph.D. 

March 21, 2006 
Contents 
Preface..................................................................................................................................3 
Introduction..............................................................................................................5 
Scope of Work .........................................................................................................6 
Task 1. Conduct Interviews of Knowledgeable Persons .............................6 
Task 2. Prepare Work Plan ..........................................................................6 
Task 3. Finalize Support Alternatives..........................................................7 
Task 4. Select Evaluation Panel...................................................................7 
Task 5. Finalize Evaluation Criteria and Methodology...............................8 
Task 6. Conduct Policy Analysis and Develop Recommendations.............8 
Task 7. Develop Implementation Recommendations..................................9 
Task 8. Organize and Manage the Project ...................................................9 
Organization...........................................................................................................10 
Schedule and Budget..............................................................................................11 
References Cited....................................................................................................12 
Appendix A. Cold Fusion Position Paper..........................................................................13 
Appendix B. PowerPoint Presentation of Policy Analysis for Cold Fusion......................13 
Appendix C. Annotated Bibliography and Website Review .............................................13 
Preface 
Cold fusion burst upon the scene in 1989 as a major scientific breakthrough with enormous 
promise as an unlimited and virtually free source of energy. In the ensuing months tremendous 
fervor in scientific and political arenas at first gradually and then rather suddenly gave way to 
disillusion, marginalization and even ridicule. By late 1990 most “mainstream” scientists became 
convinced that the phenomenon did not exist, and politicians and the public generally followed 
suit. Since then nearly everyone, including scientists and the general public, has believed that 
cold fusion is a dead issue. 

However, a relatively small number of reputable scientists – including both physicists and 
chemists – have continued to conduct research and develop theories for what they believe to be a 
“real” phenomenon. Continued promising experimental results in the 16 years since cold fusion 
was “debunked” has inspired these dedicated few to continue their efforts in spite of being 
marginalized and even experiencing damage to their careers in some cases. Cold fusion has been 
characterized as “undead science”1 – neither fully alive as part of mainstream scientific research 
nor fully dead, like N rays, polywater and other phenomena once widely embraced but now fully 
discredited.  

Several aspects of cold fusion make it a particularly cogent topic for a policy analysis 
investigation: 
• 
• 
• 
The enormous potential benefit to mankind should it eventually prove to be “true” – 
for energy supply, pollution reduction, alleviation of poverty, and abatement of 
human suffering 
The proper way to balance the probability of a potential major new discovery 
becoming valid – even if at first widely considered to be very low – against the size 
of the social benefit of the discovery, if the benefit is very large 
How to allocate resources to marginalized (but potentially very important and 
beneficial) phenomena in the context of large expenditures for other perceived 
national priorities, such as transportation infrastructure projects or pursuit of 
potentially non-defensive wars to assure petroleum supplies 
A Conference Course in Policy Analysis has been accomplished with the objectives of “making 
the case” for a policy analysis of cold fusion research, developing the needed background 
information, and establishing the framework for conducting the analysis. Specifically, the 
Conference Course includes the following five work products: 


1 Simon, Bart. Undead Science: Science Studies and the Afterlife of Cold Fusion. New Brunswick, New Jersey: 

Rutgers University Press, 2002. 
• 
Position Paper. Documents the rationale for a policy analysis study and sets the stage for 
conducting the study.  
• 
Electronic Presentation. Summary of Conference Course findings, recommendations, and 
proposal for the cold fusion policy analysis study (in Microsoft PowerPoint). 
• 
Cold Fusion Policy Research Proposal. Lays out the scope of the policy analysis study 
along with the proposed methodology, budget and schedule, as the basis for funding the 
study. 
• 
Annotated Bibliography and Website Review. Includes the most significant resources 
regarding the history, development, technical basis, and current status of cold fusion. 
(Referred to hereinafter as “Annotated Bibliography” to conserve space). 
• 
Hard Copy and Electronic File Library. Contains the principal resources considered in the 
annotated bibliography and website review for future reference in a policy analysis study. 

This proposal lays out a program of work for a policy analysis on the question of future support 
for research and development of cold fusion.  

The Library (last work product listed) is in the possession of the author and will be made 
available to the project when it is initiated. A copy of the Position Paper is provided in Appendix 
A of this Proposal. The Presentation is in Appendix B. The Annotated Bibliography and Website 
Review is included in Appendix C.  


1. Introduction 

Cold fusion may, or may not, be real. Nearly 17 years have elapsed since it was announced in a 
press conference at the University of Utah in March 1989. After the initial announcement, cold 
fusion was intensively studied at numerous organizations and by many scientists. Primarily 
because of difficulties in reproducibility of the phenomenon, and the absence of expected nuclear 
byproducts of the energy production (based on hot fusion research), it was quickly – within a few 
weeks – deemed to be nonexistent by mainstream science. 

For at least two reasons – the apparent numerous mistakes that were made in the way cold fusion 
was dealt with (by both proponents and skeptics) in the initial weeks (as well as the years since), 
and the enormous potential benefit to humanity – the phenomenon is worthy of careful policy 
analysis. This is so if even if the probability of its being real is low, which is not the case, as 
indicated by continued research since 1990. The phenomenon of cold fusion is too important to 
be allowed to languish without a full analysis in a public policy context of whether it should 
receive research and development support. Decision-making methods and outcomes in the past 
have been completely inadequate to the task, given the potential importance of cold fusion to 
human welfare, the continuing promising research results even in a marginalized research 
setting, and the mistakes made by advocates and opponents when cold fusion was first 
introduced and in the years since. 

The Position Paper prepared as the primary work product of the Conference Course in Policy 
analysis accomplishes several tasks: 1) provides a high-level technical overview; 2) reviews the 
history of cold fusion; 3) develops the case that cold fusion, although currently highly 
marginalized, is potentially important enough to mankind to warrant a rigorous policy analysis 
study; and 4) outlines candidate policy alternatives, methods and criteria for fiscal and other 
support of cold fusion research. Finally, Section 5 of the Position Paper sets the stage for a “full-
blown” policy analysis study of cold fusion support. It includes the following components: 
Policy Alternatives. At a high level, to be subdivided into sub-alternatives as needed 
during the study. 
• 
Panel Participants. In terms of the types of qualifications and areas of expertise. 

Broad-based definitions, with formalization and selection of individuals in the study. 
• 
Evaluation Criteria. Specification of the parameters to be used to conduct the 
evaluation of the defined alternatives 
• 
Methods of Analysis. Analysis methods, tools, and reporting according to accepted 
practices and standards for policy research at the LBJ School of Public Affairs. 
• 
Implementation of Findings. Outline of necessary considerations in implementing the 
panel recommendations given the marginalized status of cold fusion  
• 
The purpose of this proposal is to flesh out these activities outlined in the Position Paper and 
organize them into a work breakdown structure format which allows clear specification of the 
activities to be performed. The overall strategy of the project will be to assemble a Project Team 
that will perform most of the work and fully support the Evaluation Panel as it conducts the 
policy analysis. 


2. Scope of Work 

The scope of activities to be performed for the policy analysis project for cold fusion is 
organized using a work breakdown structure format – with tasks and work elements. For each 
task, an introduction is provided along with the objectives of the task. 

Task 1. Conduct Interviews of Knowledgeable Persons 
The Conference Course work products (Library, Annotated Bibliography, and Position Paper) 
are intended to be a “starting point” for setting up the policy analysis project. The purpose of this 
task is to contact key persons knowledgeable of the technical aspects cold fusion, current status 
of development, and support requirements to maximize potential for future development. The 
Project Team will perform this task using the following work elements: 
Determine qualifications criteria for candidates based on background, familiarity with 
cold fusion issues, credentials in past contributions and other factors 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Using the Position Paper and Annotated Bibliography as the starting point, and 
subsequently by networking, identify “long list” of candidates to be interviewed 
Make initial contact with long-list candidates to determine interest in participation 
Prepare short list of candidates after screening  
Develop interview checklist to meet the objectives of this Task 
Make contact and conduct interviews with short-listed candidates 
Prepare summary reports of individual interviews as well as a consolidated report of 
findings 
The interview reports and consolidated report will be used as resource material for conducting 
the policy analysis project. 

Task 2. Prepare Work Plan 
A Work Plan will be prepared by the Project Team at the outset to guide the work of the project. 

The contents of this proposal will serve as the starting point, and the results of the interviews in 
Task 1 will provide the basis for finalizing the Work Plan. Work elements for this task include 
the following: 
Determine final Work Plan format to comply with any requirements of the funding 
entity or other identified internal or external requirements 
Carry over the relevant components of this proposal into the formatted Work Plan 
Incorporate the results from Task 1 interviews to finalize the Work Plan 
• 
Perform updates and modifications as required, including fleshing out the scope as 
envisioned in this proposal with specific details and conditions at the outset of the 
project 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
The Work Plan will then be updated as necessary during the conduct of the project to reflect 
changed conditions or to incorporate interim findings that have an impact on the scope or 
conduct of the project. 

Task 3. Finalize Support Alternatives 
High-level alternatives (scenarios) for cold fusion support were outlined in Section 5 of the 
Position Paper. The Project Team will use these scenarios as a starting point for completing 
support scenarios at the appropriate level of detail. The following work elements will be 
performed for this task: 
Establish requirements to be met by scenario candidates, such as degree of “fineness” 
or “coarseness” (translating into different numbers of candidates) for policy analysis 
project 
Review the previously prepared alternatives and modify them as necessary to meet 
project requirement 
Prepare final write-ups of each alternative with range of content and level of detail to 
fully support the policy analysis 
Task 4. Select Evaluation Panel 
One of the principal criticisms of past cold fusion evaluations has been that the evaluators 
selected represented a far too narrow range of expertise and perspective for the potential 
importance of the phenomenon to society. The objective of this task is to select a broad-based 
panel to conduct the policy analysis and make recommendations for the future support of cold 
fusion. The Project Team will perform this task with the following work elements: 
Establish criteria for specifying the qualifications of the members of the panel, with 
emphasis not only on technical (“reality of cold fusion”) considerations, but other 
socially and ethically important factors as specified in the Position Paper 
Based on the selected criteria, determine the number of participants and specification 
of anticipated background and qualifications of each (or each category) 
Determine the “top three” candidates  for each panel position (or category of position) 
on a nationwide basis 
Establish technological basis for conducting the Panel’s work, including 
teleconference or videoconferencing, in order to conserve project resources 
• 
Based on the Work Plan, summarize the scope of activities of Panel members and 
associated schedule and budget 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Contact Panel candidates, provide copies of the Work Plan and Panel Scope of 
activities; secure commitments for participation 
Backup candidates will be tentatively identified for each Panel member in the event of dropouts 
or unforeseen conflicts of interest, or other factor that prevent participation in Panel functions. 

Task 5. Finalize Evaluation Criteria and Methodology 
The methodology selected and configured for the specific needs of the policy analysis for cold 
fusion is one of the most important tasks of the project, not only to ensure a sound and useful 
outcome, but also because of the problems experienced and documented in past evaluations. The 
objective of this task is to ensure that the methods used are specific and defensible. The Project 
Team will identify the best approach by performing the following work elements: 
Conduct a survey of policy analysis methods used in previous work involving similar 
types of support phenomena and associated issues 
Review each method for applicability to the cold fusion policy analysis, giving 
particular consideration to the unique status of the phenomena as “undead science” 
but with enormous potential for social benefit 
Select the most appropriate methods(s) and configure it for the specific circumstances 
of cold fusion and its marginalized condition 
Prepare a brief report describing the selected method(s), applicability to the cold 
fusion case, and configuration accomplished  
It is anticipated that a level of “iterative” effort will be required for this task to fine-tune the 
methodology to ensure a good outcome, given the unusual circumstances, complexity of issues, 
history of marginalization, and continued widespread perceptions of cold fusion as a case study 
in “bad”, “fraudulent” or “voodoo” science.. 

Task 6. Conduct Policy Analysis and Develop Recommendations 
This task is the heart of the policy analysis project for cold fusion support. The preparatory tasks 
come to fruition at this stage as the policy analysis work is actually accomplished. The following 
work elements will be performed by the Project Team: 
Engage the Evaluation Panel in the policy analysis methodology to evaluate the 
selected support scenarios using the selected criteria 
Carefully consider the merits of each scenario and document the results in a 
systematic and defensible manner 
• 
Tabulate the results and summarize for review and preliminary approval by the Panel 
members as the concluding work of the Panel for the analysis 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Compile the tabulated results into a draft report after the Panel completes its work; 
the draft report will then be reviewed by the Panel members individually and, if 
necessary, as a group to resolve remaining issues or address open items for the 
various scenarios 
Finalize the report after Evaluation Panel has completed its review and submit it to 
the sponsoring entity 
Task 7. Develop Implementation Recommendations 
It may be anticipated that the Evaluation Panel will gain an in-depth and knowledgeable 
perspective as a result of its policy analysis work. The Project Team will engage the Panel to 
perform the following work elements to develop additional recommendations for 
implementation. 

Review current public policies toward cold fusion and the history that resulted in 
those policies 
Consider the Panel’s policy recommendations in light of the current policies 
Make additional implementation recommendations to enhance, to the extent possible, 
the probability that the Panels policy recommendations will be adopted. 

Given the situation with cold fusion, the implementation recommendations may be as important 
as the policy recommendations for the best possible outcome. 

Task 8. Organize and Manage the Project 
Effective organization and management are key to the success of complex policy analysis 
projects such as the one proposed here for cold fusion. The Project Team will perform the 
following work elements to assure adequate management of the project: 
Organize and initiate the project, beginning with the Work Plan specified in Task 1 
and following the provisions of the Work Plan thereafter 
Provide periodic progress reports (generally monthly) as specified by the sponsoring 
entity; include technical progress, schedule status, and budget expenditures for each 
task in comparison with the value of work performed 


3. Organization 

The policy analysis project will be performed under the supervision of a faculty member at the 
LBJ School of Public Affairs, The University of Texas at Austin. Day-to-0day management will 
be accomplished by a Project Manager (PM) who is a senior graduate student in the program 
leading to a Master of Public Affairs (M.P.Aff.) degree. The work will be accomplished 
primarily by a Project Team consisting of the PM and two to five additional M.P.Aff. graduate 
students. Accepted policy analysis methods and practices at the LBJ School will be used in 
performing the project. Work products prepared by the Evaluation Panel and the Project Team 
will be reviewed and approved by the faculty supervisor. 


4. Schedule and Budget 

A high-level schedule for the Tasks specified in Section 1 is shown below. The schedule will be 
amplified as required when the Work Plan is prepared to incorporate the specific conditions of 
the project as approved by the sponsoring entity. 

Task 
Length (weeks) 
Unspecified 
Project Duration 
Total 
Note: Some tasks may be “telescoped” to allow shortening of the overall timeframe. 

The proposed budget for the proposed policy analysis project for cold fusion is $120,000. A 
tabulated budget breakdown by work breakdown structure is shown below. 

Labor 
Task 
Level (persons) 
Length (weeks) 
Total (p-w) 
Total 

39.5 ~ 40 :
Labor cost = 40 wk x 40 hr x $50/hr    $80,000 
Other Costs (travel, supplies, etc.)  
Contingency (20%)   
Total Cost  


5. Reference Cited 

1. Simon, Bart. Undead Science: Science Studies and the Afterlife of Cold Fusion. New 

Brunswick, New Jersey: Rutgers University Press, 2002. 

Cold Fusion: A Cogent Topic for Rigorous Policy Analysis 
Annotated Bibliography and Website Reviews 
Presented to: 
Kenneth Flamm, Ph.D., Professor 
PA 389, Conference Course in Policy Analysis 
LBJ School of Public Affairs 
The University of Texas at Austin 
By: 
Thomas W. Grimshaw, Ph.D. 

March 21, 2006 
Contents 
Preface..................................................................................................................................3 
Introduction..............................................................................................................5 
Annotated Bibliography...........................................................................................6 
Bibliography with Annotations....................................................................6 
References Reviewed But Not Annotated .................................................40 
Website Reviews....................................................................................................41 
Primary Cold Fusion Websites, with Annotations.....................................41 
Cold Fusion Websites of Secondary Interest (without Annotations).........54 
Conclusion: A Re-evaluation of Cold Fusion Based on  
Sound Policy Analysis Is Needed..........................................................................55 
Library of Resources..............................................................................................57 
Appendix A. Homepages of Annotated Websites .............................................................58 
Preface 
Cold fusion burst upon the scene in 1989 as a major scientific breakthrough with enormous 
promise as a source of unlimited and virtually free energy to meet society’s needs. In the ensuing 
weeks tremendous fervor in the scientific and political arenas at first gradually and then rather 
suddenly gave way to disillusion, marginalization and even ridicule. By early 1990 most 
“mainstream” scientists became convinced that the phenomenon did not exist, and politicians 
and the public generally followed suit. Since then nearly everyone, including scientists and 
energy policymakers, have believed that cold fusion is a dead issue. As recently as January 2006, 
cold fusion was brought up in the context of scientific missteps or fraud1 
However, a relatively small group of reputable scientists has continued to conduct research and 
develop theories for what they believe to be a “real” phenomenon of cold fusion. Continued 
promising experimental results in the 16 years since cold fusion was “debunked” has inspired 
these dedicated few to continue their efforts in spite of being marginalized and even experiencing 
damage to their careers in some cases. Cold fusion research since 1989 has been characterized2 
as “undead science” – neither fully alive as part of mainstream scientific research nor fully dead, 
like N rays, polywater and other phenomena once widely embraced but now fully discredited.  

Examination of the record on cold fusion indicates an urgent need for a re-evaluation under a 
broader context than has previously been accomplished. It appears that past evaluations have 
been fraught with mistakes, have been performed by the wrong experts, have led to erroneous 
conclusions about cold fusion, and have most probably deprived humankind of a new scientific 
field – at the least – and perhaps also a new source of cheap unlimited energy.  

What should be done regarding research in cold fusion in the future?  

This question is particularly well suited to be addressed by a rigorous policy analysis. A 
Conference Course in Policy Analysis has therefore been accomplished with the objectives of 
“making the case” for a policy analysis of cold fusion research, developing the needed 
background information, and establishing the framework for conducting the analysis. 

Specifically, the Conference Course includes five work products: 
• 
Position Paper. Documents the rationale for a policy analysis study and sets the stage for 
conducting the study. 
• 
Electronic Presentation. Summary of Conference Course findings, recommendations, and 
proposal for the cold fusion policy analysis study (in Microsoft PowerPoint). 


1 Kevles, Bettann, H. “When Fraud Wriggles Itself into Science”. Austin American-Statesman (January 15, 2006), p. 


H1, H4. 


2 Simon, Bart. Undead Science: Science Studies and the Afterlife of Cold Fusion. New Brunswick, New Jersey: 

Rutgers University Press, 2002. 
• 
Cold Fusion Policy Research Proposal. Lays out the scope of the policy analysis study 
along with the proposed methodology, budget and schedule, as the basis for funding the 
study. 
• 
Annotated Bibliography and Website Review. Includes the most significant resources 
regarding the history, development, technical basis, and current status of cold fusion. 
• 
Hard Copy And Electronic File Library. Contains the principal resources considered in 
the annotated bibliography and website review for future reference in a policy analysis 
study. 


1 Introduction 

Despite its problems of stigmatization and marginalization as a “respectable” area of energy 
research, cold fusion may hold sufficient promise, both as a new field of scientific investigation 
and as a source of abundant, very low-cost energy, to warrant a rigorous policy analysis study. A 
review of the most relevant previously published studies is essential to determining whether such 
a study is warranted.  

This review of previous work on cold fusion includes peer-reviewed papers, general and specific 
books on the topic, “gray” (non-peer-reviewed) literature, and websites that contain information 
on the subject. An attempt has been made to provide reasonably balanced coverage of materials 
prepared by both proponents and skeptics of cold fusion. Coverage of the points of view and 
positions of the skeptics is particularly necessary because cold fusion proponents must fully 
understand the viewpoints of the opponents if they are to be effective in developing counter-
arguments and conducting research that fully addresses the issues raised by the skeptics. 

At the same time, a bias toward at least giving cold fusion “a second chance” or a more balanced 
(fairer) hearing – given the numerous mistakes that were made by both proponents and skeptics 
when it was initially introduced – is freely admitted. Otherwise there would be no motivation to 
conduct the review, and cold fusion could be left in its current marginalized state.  

One salient fact emerges from all the commotion around the cold fusion controversy – excess 
heat beyond what can be accounted for by chemical reactions is produced, which implies, by 
default, that a nuclear process is involved. As noted by the U.S. Department of Energy panel that 
evaluated cold fusion as early as 1989 (and recommended that no special funding be provided): 
Ordinarily, new scientific discoveries are claimed to be consistent and reproducible; as a result, if the 
experiments are not complicated, the discovery can usually be confirmed or disproved in a few months. 

The claims of cold fusion, however, are unusual in that even the strongest proponents of cold fusion assert 
that the experiments, for unknown reasons, are not consistent and reproducible at the present time. 

However, even a single short but valid cold fusion period would be revolutionary (italics added by author). 

Valid observations of excess heat have now been made and substantiated not in just one, but in 
many experiments performed by different researchers working in numerous laboratory settings 
and using a large variety of methods and equipment. 

This Annotated Bibliography and Website Review has been prepared in support of a proposed 
re-evaluation of cold fusion in a broader context, as a policy analysis project. Many references 
and websites on cold fusion have been identified, and the ones most relevant to a policy analysis 
were selected for annotation. Section 2 provides the annotated references first, and then lists 
those that were reviewed but not annotated. Section 3 is organized in a similar manner for 
websites that were reviewed and annotated in part. The conclusions and recommendations that 
emerge from the review of resources are provided in Section 4. A library containing most of the 
resources reviewed has been assembled and is described in Section 5; it will be made available to 
the project team when the cold fusion policy analysis project is conducted. Homepages from the 
websites selected for annotation are provided in Appendix A. 


2 Annotated Bibliography 

Numerous papers have been prepared on the topic of cold fusion. Most of them are highly 
technical in their content and contributions to the subject. Many are available in non-peer-
reviewed sources because of the marginalization of cold fusion from mainstream scientific 
research. A comprehensive survey of the most significant references on cold fusion research 
results, history and development was performed. The references selected for annotation include 
the following: 
• 
Introductory books and papers that are useful for “grounding” those becoming interested 
in cold fusion. 
• 
Descriptive works that cover the 1989 announcement and subsequent events that affected 
cold fusion development. 
• 
Non-technical publications on the relation of cold fusion and its history to various topics, 
such as the role of the press in science communication, the peer-review method of 
scientific verification, the sociology of the research community of chemists and 
physicists, and public policies adopted to date toward cold fusion. 
• 
Semi-technical or “light” technical works that bring out key facts or clearly support (or 
debunk) the cold fusion phenomenon. 

The primary criterion used to determine whether a candidate reference was selected for 
annotation was how well it supports (or does not support) the case for conducting a policy 
analysis study, and how useful it is likely to be when the study is performed in the future. 

Bibliography with Annotations 
The references selected for annotation are included below. Each reference consists of four parts: 
• 
Citation. Following the format specified by the LBJ School of Public Affairs 
• 
Contents. Chapters or headings and subheadings, if present, to provide an overview of the 
contents 
• 
Annotations. Significant findings or key points in summary form, using a “bullet” format 
• 
Significance to Policy Analysis. Usually as a concluding bullet or two in the Annotations 
The references are shown in alphabetical order by lead author. 

Beaudette, Charles G. Excess Heat: Why Cold Fusion Research Prevailed. 2nd ed. South Bristol, 
Maine: Oak Grove Press, 2002. 

Contents 
Part One: Anomalous Power 


1. The Significant Claim 

2. The Overburden 

3. The Enigma of Discovery 

4. A Power Burst 

Part Two: Criticism 


5. Baltimore 

6. Four Press Conferences 

7. The DOE Panel 

8. The Critics: I 

9. The Critics: II 

Part Three: Validation 


10. Ramsey’s Way 

11. Variety of Method 

12. Protocols 

13. Without Exception 

14. Validation 

15. Posthumous Heat 

Part Four: Low Energy Nuclear Reaction’s Nuclear 
Products 


16. Helium-Four 

17. Tritium and Helium-Three 

18. Neutrons 

19. Gamma Rays and Transmutation 

20. Theoretical Musing 

Part Five: Resolution 


21. Outlook 

22. The Skeptics 

23. Un Cri du Coeur 

24. Resolution 

• The definitive later work on the development and current status of cold fusion (2002) 
[Eugene Mallove’s “Fire on Ice”, 1991 is the definitive earlier work] 
• An excellent summation of the status, and correct way to think about cold fusion, is in 
Nagel’s “Introduction”: 
This book lays the needed foundation for a forward-looking plan to (1) put the experimental 
situation on a firm basis, (2) arrive at the desired understanding, and (3) exploit the remarkable 
new effect(s) of cold fusion for the good of humans and their planet 
• Makes an excellent case for the reality of cold fusion through several means: 
Points out the errors in science committed during the early weeks after 
announcement, and since 
Demonstrates multiple full, independent verifications of excess heat by 1994 by more 
than 100 researchers, and reviews the specifics for seven – Hansen, Wilson, 
McKubre, Oriani, Huggins, Miles, Arata 
Answers each of the skeptics (Huizenga, Close, Taubes, Park, etc.) and their 
respective objections point by point 
Specifically addresses the primary objection of the lack of nuclear byproducts 
Outlines progress in the theoretical underpinnings of cold fusion to date 
• Tends to be more retrospective, with focus on errors of the past (to get the recognition 
needed for cold fusion) rather than prospective – what to do next – and solutions-oriented 
• A clear defense of cold fusion that is essential background to a rigorous policy analysis; 
probably the best overall reference for cold fusion analysis 
• Includes good summary of the ERAB 1989 report and its flaws 
• Provides a good description of the May 1-2, 1989 assault at the APS meeting in Baltimore – 
central roles of Lewis and Koonin 
Beaudette, Charles. Response to the DOE/2004 Review of Cold Fusion Research. Unpublished 
Paper, 16 p. March 1, 2005. Online. Available www.lenr-canr.org. Accessed October 2005. 

Contents 
No subsections included 
• Begins with a review of the 2004 DOE review process 
• “The DOE/OS accomplished the best peer-review evaluation that was possible under the 
difficult circumstances of the CFRs (cold fusion research’s) place in the professional 
community” 
• Implies that reviewers were chosen ‘who were not active in the field, did not know of its key 
experiments, and were ignorant of its literature”. 
• According to Peter Hagelstein, “In the end, the reviewers said that a study should be funded 
if a proposal is strong. You can’t ask for much more than that”. 
• Uses an unusual approach – outlines the claims of Pons and Fleischmann and discusses the 


2004 Review results in that format: 

1. First claim, 89/3 

2. Second claim, 89/3 

3. Third claim, 89/3 

4. Fourth claim, 89/3 

• Lays to rest the problem of reproducibility 
Brassani, T, E Del Giudice, and G Perparata. The Science of Cold Fusion – Proceedings of the II 
Annual Conference on Cold Fusion. Bologna, Italy: Italian Physical Society, 1991 
Contents 
Foreword 
Contributed Papers 


41 papers 

Invited Papers 


12 papers 

Summaries 


2 papers: H Gerischer, M Fleischman 

Appendix: WN Hansen report on Pons & Fleischmann calorimetry data 
• Second ICCF conference, 1991, which is now up to #12 as of November 2005 (Yokohama, 
Japan) 
• Broad range of papers presented, generally supportive of cold fusion 
• Highly technical reports, in general, except for portions of the two summaries 
• Primarily useful as an example of the apparently high quality of research reported in the 
ICCF meetings 
Close, Frank. Too Hot to Handle: the Story of the Race for Cold Fusion. London: W.H. Allen, 
Contents 


1. The Greatest Discovery Since Fire 

PART ONE: Genesis 


2. Nothing New Under the Sun 

3. The Sun on Earth 

4. Cold Fusion 

5. The Chemists 

6. The Dispute 

7. Harwell 

PART TWO: Deuteronomy 


8. The First Reactions 

9. The Parting of the Waters 

10. Money 

11. The Caltech Story 

12. From Spring to Fall 

13. International Reactions 

14. Test-Tube Fusion: Science or Non-Science? 


PART THREE: Revelations 


15. The Spy in the Lab 

16. Credibility 

17. “It’s Not Fusion 

18. The First Anniversary 

19. Assessment 

Appendix. Excess Heat in Calorimetry 
Appendix. Fusion Does NOT Give the Earth’s 
Heat! 

Notes 
• Has intro chapter on the announcement by Pons & Fleischmann 
• Well written, with rich detail on the events and players 
• Not as definitively or as negatively written as Huizenga’s “Fiasco” or Park’s “Voodoo 
Science” 
• “Genesis” provides background – elementary fusion, pre-1989 history, muon-catalyzed 
fusion, Steven Jones and the BYU experiments, individual and joint biographies, the UU-
BYU dispute 
• “Deuteronomy” relates the events after the March 23 announcement, by location and 
installation or provider; major focus on CalTech; chapter on international research 
• “Revelations” is an interpretation of what happened – perception of the actual vs what the 
cold fusion proponents thought, with respect to data obtained in experiments and deuterium 
vs water reactions 
• Focus is on credibility of the researchers and the potential for data manipulation 
• “Assessment” (Ch 19) covers several elements of the controversy 
Pons & Fleischmann problems and mistakes around the announcement 
Role of the media 
The role of belief – by Pons & Fleischmann and by other researchers 
• The irregularity of the Pons & Fleischmann report on March 23 was caused by the sense of 
competition from Jones & others at BYU 
Fleischmann, M. and Stanley Pons. “Electrochemically Induced Nuclear Fusion of Deuterium.” 
J. Electroanal. Chem., vol. 261, p. 301 and Errata in vol. 263 (1989). 

Contents 


Introduction 

Experimental 


Results 



Discussion 

Acknowledgement 

References 
• 
A very short paper to have created such a stir! 
• 
Highly technical and very dense with numerical data 
• 
“Discussion” includes appropriate qualifier that seems to be routinely overlooked or ignored: 
“We realize that the results reported here raise more questions than they provide answers, 
and that much further work is required on this topic.” 
• 
The technical nature of the paper – directed to peer professionals rather than lay persons – 
limit its direct input or usefulness for Policy Analysis for cold fusion 
• 
Rather, secondary sources that provide reliable, accurate interpretations will be more useful 
for non-chemists and non-physicists 
Fox, Hal. Cold Fusion Impact in the Energy Age. 2nd ed. Salt Lake City, Utah: Fusion 
Information Cente,. 1992. 
Contents 
Foreword 
20. Development of New Energy Technology 
21. Commercializing Cold Fusion 
22. Cold Fusion Impact On Governments 
23. Cold Fusion Impact On Energy Policy 
24. Cold Fusion Impact On Environment 
25. Cold Fusion Impact On Agriculture 
26. Cold Fusion Impact On Transportation Industries 
27. Cold Fusion Impact On Manufacturing 
28. Cold Fusion Impact On the Financial Community 
29. Cold Fusion Impact On Education 
30. Enhanced Energy Technology 
31. Milestones of Cold Fusion Development 
Appendix. Cold Fusion Patent Application List 
Appendix. Selected Readings  
• A highly promotional piece published by the Fusion Information Center in the early period 
after rejection 
• References cold fusion as “Fleischmann-Pons Effect” (FPE) 
• Very similar, highly optimistic (and premature) approach of Rothwell, ____ 
• Written for lay audiences 
• Good summary of “Essential Conditions for Commercialization” 
1. The amount of excess heat generated must be sufficient for economic performance 
2. The phenomena must be repeatable, controllable, reliable, and safe. 
3. The costs of production plus operation must be economically attractive, or have an 
economical advantage over the competing energy systems. 
4. The systems must be clean, non-polluting and non-hazardous 
5. There must be market acceptance 
• 1992: EPRI funded $2 M of SRI (McKubre) work 
• The ”Impact On…” sections are hypothetical prognoses under highly optimistic assumptions 
• Chapter 11 appears to be an unfortunate and very damaging description of non-cold-fusion 
devices that seem to violate the laws of thermodynamics 
• Chapter 12 provides an excellent chronology of cold fusion events, starting with Rafelski and 
Jones article (“Cold Nuclear Fusion” in Scientific American (7/87) and ending with ICCF 3, 
Nagoya, Japan (10/92) 
• Excellent summary of patent applications as of 1992 in Appendix 1 
• Floppy disk (3.5”) containing 90 pages of “Bibliography of Cold Fusion” 
Hagelstein, Peter L., Michael C.H. McKubre, David J. Nagel, Talbot A. Chubb, and Randall J. 
Hekman. “New Physical Effects in Metal Deuterides.” Paper prepared for U.S. Department of 
Energy Review Panel on Cold Fusion. 2004. 
Contents 
1. Introduction 
2. Excess Heat Effects in Fleischmann-Pons 
Experiments 
2.1. Total Excess Energy Production 
2.2. Excess Heat and Loading 
2.3. Surface Chemical Potential 
2.4. Temperature Dependence 
2.5. Excess Heat and Current Density 
2.6. Deuterium Flux and Triggering Issues 
3. Helium and Excess Heat 
3.1. Correlation of Excess Heat and Helium 
3.2. Reaction Q Value 
4. Excess Heat Beyond the Basic Fleischmann- 
Pons Experiment 
4.1. Self-Sustaining Excess Heat Effect 
4.2. Excess Heat in Other Metal Deuterides 
4.3. Indirect Gas Loading 
5. Nuclear Emissions 
5.1. The Jones Experiment 
5.2. Stimulation of Nuclear Emissions with Electrical Current 
5.3. Neutrons from IT Shards in Deuterium Gas 
5.4. Relation between Neutron Emission and Excess Heat 
Effect 
5.5. Nuclear Emissions not Attributable to Deuteron-Deuteron 
Fusion 
5.6. Broad Proton and Alpha Spectrum from Deuterons on 
TiDx 
6. Conclusions 
• The paper published by CF protagonists in preparation for the 2004 U.S. DOE review (see 
also U.S. DOE….) 
• Somewhat technical in content, of necessity, but a mandatory paper for review by serious CF 
researchers 
• Two topics were selected from a broad spectrum for the DOE review – excess heat and 
nuclear emissions from deuterated metals 
• Most skeptics of excess heat attribute the observations as errors in calorimetry, which has 
been shown to be accurate 
• Excess heat is generated when loading (D/Pd ratio) exceeds 0.875; is parabolic above that 
level 
• “The notion that deuterons are somehow squeezed together, so as to fuse at high loading or 
high fugacity…is not considered a plausible explanation.” 
• Excess heat generation is affected by several variables – loading, surface chemical potential, 
temperature, current density, and deuterium flux 
• “Searches for neutrons, tritons, and other energetic emissions in quantitative association with 
excess heat effect have uniformly produced null results.” 
• “The main focus of attention has been on helium as the primary nuclear reaction product.” 
− 
Helium production varies linearly with excess power 
− 
The amount of helium produced is lower than expected by a factor of two 
− 
“Helium is partially retained, and dissolved helium is released only slowly to the gas 
phase for analysis.” 
•  “…the argument in support of reaction mechanisms consistent with D+D->4He is indirect.” 
• “The importance of the basic Fleischmann-Pons effect…is primarily scientific in the sense 
that the research provides strong evidence of a new excess heat effect of nuclear origins.” 
• Conclusions 
− “The research discussed in this paper provides evidence for effects in three 
categories: 
(1) The existence of a physical effect that produces heat in metal deuterides. The heat is measured 
in quantities greatly exceeding all known chemical processes and the results are many times 
in excess of determined errors using several kinds of apparatus. In addition, the observations 
have been reproduced can be reproduced at will when the proper conditions are obtained, 
and show the same patterns of behavior. Furthermore, many of the reason for failure to 
reproduce the heat effect have been discovered. 
(2) The production of 4He as an ash associated with the excess heat, in amounts commensurate 
with a r4actio mechanism consistent with D+D -> 4He + 23.8MeV (heat) 
(3) A physical effect that results in the emission of: (a) energetic particles consistent with d(d,n) 
3He and d(d,p)t fusion reactions, and (b) energetic alphas and protons with energies in 
excess of 10 MeV, and other emissions not consistent with deuteron-deuteron reactions. 
Hideo, Kozima. Discovery of the Cold Fusion Phenomenon – Development of Solid State – 
Nuclear Physics and the Energy Crisis in the 21st Century. Tokyo, Japan, Ohotake Shuppan Inc., 
Contents 
1. On the Beginning – Nine Years of Cold Fusion Research 
2. Dream of Material Transmutation Realized by Nuclear Reaction 
3. Catalyst Accelerates Reactions – It is a Riddle 
4. What is the Nuclear Fusion Reaction? 
5. Discovery of the Cold Fusion Phenomenon 
6. Cold Fusion Phenomenon Occurs in Deuterated Materials 
7. Cold Fusion Occurs in Hydrated Materials, Too 
8. Thermal Neutron Plays a Key Role in Cold Fusion Phenomenon 
9. Nuclear Transmutation Occurs in Solids, Also 
10. Other Events of Cold Fusion and Characteristics of a Phenomenological Theory 
11. Cold Fusion Phenomenon is Explained by TNCF Model 
12. Physical Foundation of the TNCF Model 
13. Various Theories Have Been Proposed for Cold Fusion Phenomenon 
14. Energy Crisis in 21st Century and the Cold Fusion Research 
15. Postscript – In the Age of paradigm Revolution 
16. Essays on Science and Cold Fusion Research by Scientists 
17. Appendices 
18. References 
• Obtained from Inter-library loan and copied portions only 
• Appears to be a translation from Japanese 
• Recounts the author’s personal experience in cold fusion research 
• Provides a review of various aspects of cold fusion in a series of technical chapters 
• Sets forth his own Trapped Neutron Catalyzed Fusion (TNCF) model as a theory for cold 
fusion phenomena 
• Scope is broadened to include non-cold-fusion topics, including the 21st Century energy 
crisis and paradigm shifts. 
• Includes five essays by other scientists on cold fusion and other scientific topics 
Peter Gluck: “…all the unexpected and highly desirable phenomena take place in 
very limited active areas, and the research strategy is to breed and multiply and 
reinforce and enhance these active areas.” 
• Primary significance to Policy Analysis for cold fusion is its role as another major 
reinforcement of the reality of the cold fusion phenomenon 
Hoffman, Nate. A Dialogue on Chemically Induced Nuclear Effects: a Guide for the Perplexed 
about Cold Fusion. La Grange Park, Illinois: American Nuclear Society, 1995. 
Contents 
Foreword 
Preface 
One. 
History 
Two. 
Neutron Measurements and Possible Artifacts 
Three. 
Radon and Natural Radioactivity Artifacts 
Four. 
Artifacts Associated with Isotopic or Chemical Changes on Palladium Cathode Surfaces 
Five. 
Charged-Particle, Photon, Tritium, and Helium Measurements and Possible Artifacts 
Six.  
Possible Artifacts Associated with Heat Measurement in Palladium/Deuterium Systems 
Seven. 
Statistical Considerations Important to Anomalous Nuclear Effects in Deuterium/Solid Systems 
Eight. 
The Half Moon Bay Review on Anomalous Nuclear Measurements in Deuterium/Solid Systems 
Nine. 
Experiments Without Apparent Artifacts 
Ten. 
Summary of Anomalous Nuclear Effects in Deuterium/Solid Systems 
Appendix A. The Pd-H and Ti-H Phase Systems 
Appendix B. The Concrete/Heavy Water System 
Appendix C. Comments About Nuclear Reaction Products 
Appendix D. Helium Measurements Conducte to clarify Worldwide “Cold Fusion” Experiments 
Appendix E. Experiments to Clarify Heavy Water Neutron Flux Background 
Appendix F. d + d Fusion Branching Ratios for Sub-5-keV Energies 
Bibliography 
• 
Study funded by PERI and performed by U.S. DOE Energy Technology Center (ETEC) 
• 
“Summary” provides an excellent summary of the positions and contributions of “pro” and 
“anti” cold fusion scientists 
• 
Appears to provide a reasonably balance, if somewhat negative position based on a thorough 
review of work up to the time 
• 
Uses a dialogue metaphor to convey the information 
• 
Q: “Is the heat real?”  A: “The simple facts are as follows. Scientists experienced in the area 
of calorimetric measurements are performing these experiments. Long periods occur with no 
heat production, then, occasionally, periods suddenly occur with apparent heat production. 
These scientists become irate when so-called experts call them charlatans. The occasions 
when apparent heat appears seem to be highly sensitive to the surface conditions of the 
palladium and are not reproducible at will.” 
• 
A highly technical work covering many faces of the cold fusion phenomenon in summary 
form 
• 
Directed to a technical audience, but without heavy emphasis on underlying mathematics 
• 
The presence of anomalous heat is acknowledged, but the source is not attributed to D-D 
fusion in the absence of nuclear ash production 
• 
Most useful for PA for cold fusion for being relatively even-handed for a technical work; 
also for the excellent summaries of past works and the stances of the players in the 
controversy 
Huizenga, John R. Cold Fusion: the Scientific Fiasco of the Century. Rochester, New York: 
University of Rochester Press, 1992. 
Contents 
Preface 
Acknowledgments 
Abbreviations 
I. Press Conference 
II. Prior Events 
III. Confirmations, Retractions and Confusion 
IV. A Panel is Appointed 
V. Hearing before a Government Committee 
VI. Cold Fusion Frenzy Peaks 
VII. Publication of the Panel’s Report 
VIII. Where are the Fusion Products? 
IX. Promotion of Claims for Cold Fusion 
X. Utah Born and Bred 
XI. Cold Fusion and Polywater 
XII. Pathological Science 
XIII. Lessons 
Appendix I: University of Utah Press Release 
Appendix II: Energy Research Advisory Board Cold 
Fusion Panel 
Appendix III: Chronology of the Cold Fusion Saga 
• One of the “definitive” works that cast cold fusion out of mainstream science 
• Very detailed accounting of the events, starting with the March 23, 1989 press conference 
• As co-chairman of the U.S. DOE ERAB Cold Fusion Panel, Huizenga was in an excellent 
position to know the events and the unfolding of the controversy 
• The tone and presentation of the book clearly demonstrates the author’s biased attitude 
• Huizenga was a key member of the “core set” (from Simon Bard) that was responsible for 
discrediting cold fusion 
• Cold fusion apologists and proponents must be aware of the points made in this work, and be 
prepared to answer them (already largely accomplished by Beaudette 2002) 
• The overall condescending and ridiculing tone that emerges throughout the book reflects the 
position of having the “upper hand” 
• The lack of objectivity, which is understandable given the author’s beliefs, seems to border 
on hubris 
• Nevertheless, the work is a rich source of factual material 
• Valuable to cold fusion Policy Analysis because (as noted) it clearly lays out the points that 
must be answered 
• A lesser attitude of “interpretive charity” would be hard to imagine – Where do such strong 
positions come from in the knowledge of abundant paradigm surprises in the past? Where is 
the modicum of caution? 
• Nothing appears to be mentioned of the other co-chairman’s (Ramsey’s) point that even one 
successful demonstration of excess heat would be revolutionary and worthy of strong pursuit 
• Skates very close to making a connection between cold fusion and the Mormon faith 
• An effective technique for marginalization is employed in chapter 12 – juxtaposition of cold 
fusion with polywater 
• Chapter 13, Lessons, is characteristically biased and based on assumptions about cold fusion 
that may, or may not, prove out 
• Although now very dated (1992), continues to have strong influence on the marginalization 
of cold fusion 
Josephson, Brian D. “Pathological Disbelief”. Presentation to Nobel Laureates’ meeting, Landau, 
Germany, June 30, 2004. 
Contents 
54 Powerpoint slides 
• 
Paper prepared with the assistance of Beaudette and Krivit 
• 
“Generally accepted views” regarding a phenomenon can be wrong in two ways 
-A non-existent phenomenon is considered real (e.g., N-rays, polywater) 
-A real phenomenon is considered non-existent (e.g., continental drift, meteorites) 
Langmuir focuses on the first 
• 
For the record: “What makes the scientific establishment, in some cases, vehemently deny 
phenomena for which there is strong evidence?” 
• 
Quotes Koonin and Goodstein on how cold fusion was marginalized 
• 
Focuses somewhat on cold fusion, but gives equal or greater treatment to parapsychology. 
Also to memory of water 
• 
Quotes Lewis, Huizenga and Maddox on cold fusion marginalization 
• 
“In fact, the nuclear measurements carried out in order to try to establish what the process 
was that generated the excess heat were inaccurate. But the assertion of Pons and 
Fleischmann that heat was generated in excess of anything that could be accounted for in 
terms of chemistry depended on their calorimetry, which has never been successfully 
challenged. The DoE committee seemed not to have appreciated this fact. And the Pons-
Fleischmann excess-heat observations have been replicated many times since, in many 
different laboratories” 
• 
The 1989 U.S. DOE report said skeptically: 
‘Nuclear Fusion at room temperature, of the type discussed in this report, would 
be contrary to all understanding gained of nuclear reactions in the last half 
century; it would require the invention of an entirely new nuclear process.’ 
Comment: It does happen from time to time in science that a discovery is made 
that is ‘contrary to all present understanding’ in the field concerned (e.g., the 
discovery of the acceleration of the expansion of the universe and the non-zero 
cosmological constant). It also happens occasionally that a new process is 
discovered! 
• 
“What happened with cold fusion (and what happens in other cases as well) was the creation 
of a myth, the myth that the phenomenon was unreal. Such a myth consists of an elaborate 
story, which in principle might be true.” 
• 
“In conclusion: ‘we think that we think clearly, but that’s because we don’t think clearly’” 
Krivit, Steven B. and Nadine Winocur. The Rebirth of Cold Fusion: Real Science, Real Hope, 
Real Energy: Los Angeles, California: Pacific Oaks Press, 2004. 
Contents 
Part One: Global Energy, Global Concerns 
1. Cold Fusion Basics 
2. Immense Hope and Skepticism 
3. Fuel Scarcity and Climate Change 
4. Nuclear Fission: a Mixed Blessing 
5. The Overextended Promise of Hot Fusion 
6. The Limited Promise of Hydrogen 
7. The Distant Promise of Exotic New 
Energies 
Part Two: a Historical Perspective 
8. An Overdue Revolution in Science 
9. The Moment of Discovery 
10. Con-Fusion 
11. Ridicule and Violent Opposition 
12. A Biased 1989 Review Panel 
13. False Debunking 
14. MIT’s Fumbled (or Worse) Experiments 
15. Corroborating Evidence 
16. Cold Fusion: a Forbidden Topic 
17. Silence and Neglect 
18. Pathological Criticism 
19. Fifteen Years of Progress 
Part Three: Discoveries and Mysteries 
20. Objections Overturned 
21. Reproducibility 
22. Nuclear Evidence: Tritium 
23. Helium-4, a Harmless Byproduct 
24. Neutrons Found 
25. The Race for a Nobel Prize-Winning Theory 
26. Nuclear Energy from Normal Water 
27. Nuclear Transmutations through Chemistry 
28. Technical Summary of Cold Fusion 
Part Four: Reflection and Anticipation 
29. Threats to Academic Freedom 
30. National Security 
31. Lessons Learned 
32. Speculation about the Future 
• 
A recently published unabashedly protagonistic evaluation of cold fusion and its status 
• 
Covers a broad waterfront of topics – context of other energy sources (both conventional and 
exotic), cold fusion history, pathological skepticism, nuclear products, and sociology of cold 
fusion science 
• 
An excellent starting point for those with an open mind about cold fusion 
• 
The superiority of cold fusion over other energy sources is described fro fossil fuels, fission 
reactors, hot fusion, hydrogen, and other exotic sources 
• 
Excellent brief biographies are provide for Pons and Fleischmann 
• 
Good historical summary of cold fusion events, but (as expected) presented from a 
proponent’s point of view 
Refers to Caltech, MIT and Harwell as “bungled experiments” 
Makes a strong case for corroboration primarily of excess power, but also of helium and 
tritium 
• 
Excellent chapter on the pathology of excessive criticism and refusal to consider new data or 
new evidence when it becomes available 
• 
Good coverage of progress of verification in last 15 years – reproducibility (especially excess 
heat), tritium, helium-4, neutrons 
• 
Lengthy section on the events around Bockris and others at Texas A&M; major concern 
expressed for academic freedom 
• 
Emphasizes need for adequate (“Nobel Prize-Winning) theoretical explanation of cold fusion 
• 
Covers transmutation as well as fusion aspects of cold fusion  
Krivit, Steven B. “How Can Cold Fusion Be Real, Considering It Was Disproved by Several 
Well-Respected Labs in 1989?” Paper presented at 12th International Conference on Emerging 
Nuclear Energy Systems (ICENES’2005), Brussels, Belgium, August 21-26, 2005. Online. 
Available http://www.lenr-canr.org. Accessed September 2005. 
Contents 
1. Historical Background 
1.1 False Negatives 
1.2 Unknown Positives 
1.3 Overview of Reaction Products 
1.4 Energy Production: Selected Reports of excess Heat 
1.5 Cold Fusion/Condensed Matter Nuclear Science Volumetric… 
1.6 Heavy Element Transmutation in Cold Fusion 
1.7  Myths and Facts of Cold Fusion 
1.8 2004 U.S. DOE cold fusion Review 
1.9 Comparison of Hot and Cold Fusion 
2. Conclusions 
3. Acknowledgements 
4. References 
• 
A recent brief review of the status of cold fusion, with emphasis on falsity of the debunking 
studies and proofs in recent work 
• 
Each of the three negative studies at Caltech, MIT, and Harwell were found to be erroneous 
or to actually produce heat in 8 different post-mortem analyses 
• 
Excellent diagram showing reactants and reaction products for deuterium and water cold 
fusion systems 
• 
Six selected reports of excess heat 
• 
23 “myths” cover key aspect of cold fusion and associated controversy 
• 
Asserts that the 2004 U.S. DOE Review was “poorly orchestrated and poorly executed.” 
• 
Good comparison of cold fusion and hot fusion in six areas and 17 sub-areas 
• 
Primary significance for Policy Analysis of cold fusion is the very brief but very recent 
summary of the positive standing of the phenomenon 
Mallove, Eugene F. Fire from Ice: Searching for the Truth Behind the Cold Fusion Furor. New 
York: John Wiley & Sons, 1991. 
Contents 
Preface 
Acknowledgments 
32. Prologue: Desperately Seeking Fusion 
33. A Brief History of Hot Fusion 
34. Claiming the “Impossible” 
35. A Frenzy of Replicators 
36. Dallas and Beyond 
37. The Prehistory of Cold Fusion 
38. The Beginning of Wisdom 
39. Yes, We Have No Neutrons 
40. New Mexico Sunrise 
41. Evidence Builds and Skeptics Dig In 
42. Denial and Acceptance 
43. Approach to an Answer 
44. The Turning Point 
45. Still Under Fire 
46. Whither Cold Fusion? 
47. Fusion Confusion and Scientifico-Media 
Madness 
48. Hard Lessons in Science 
49. Whither Hot Fusion? 
Epilogue 
A Fusion Resource Guide 
• The definitive earlier pro-cold fusion work (1991) [cf Excess Heat, 2002, by Beaudette for 
the earlier definitive work 
• Two background chapters – fusion in general, and hot fusion 
• Eleven chapters (3-14) on the 1989-90 events, starting with March 23, 1989 
• Five chapters (15-19) of summation, speculation, and future developments (including hot 
fusion) 
• Author left science journalism position at MIT over ethical concerns about MIT’s behavior 
around cold fusion  
• Ch. 15, “Whither Cold Fusion?” is particularly insightful 
Table – “Groups reporting Cold Fusion Evidence” with 92 entries 
“Open Questions” shows essential path to be taken (p 253-255) 
“Funding” – need for reversal of ERAB (1989) report 
• Ch. 16 addresses the role of the press – journalism 
• Ch. 17: “Hard Lessons in Science” 
Resistance to Paradigm Shift 
The Majority fails to Risk 
Dangerous Analogies 
The Pathology of “Pathological Science” 
Ockham’s Razor 
Theory vs Experiment 
Peer Review 
The Fear of Error 
Vested Interests 
Wishful Science or a Wish Come True 
Mizuno, Tadahiko. Nuclear Transmutation: the Reality of Cold Fusion (translated by Jed 
Rothwell). Concord, New Hampshire: Infinite Energy Press, 1998. 
Contents 
Preface 
Acknowledgments 
1. Prologue 
2. The Curtain Rises on Cold Fusion 
3. The First Replication 
4. A Serious Experiment 
5. Experiments with Solid State Proton Conductors 
6. New Developments 
7. What Is the Cold Fusion Reaction 
8. Epilogue 
9. Postscript 
10. Bibliography 
11. Cold Fusion Chronology 
12. Glossary 
• Originally published in Japanese under the same title in 1997 
• “Among (the author’s) achievements in cold fusion were the first extensive reports of 
neutron measurements in Japan, pioneering work on loaded solid-state proton conductors, 
and key new studies of transmutation products” 
• An excellent summary of the status of cold fusion at the time in the Foreword by Eugene 
Mallove, one of cold fusion’s strongest proponents. 
“We … learn (from the book) about the political storms that erupted as the reigning 
scientific paradigm that separated chemistry from nuclear physics begin to collapse.” 
(p. x) 
“The evidence before us has become mountainous. It is no longer ‘overwhelmingly 
compelling; it is now certain. We now know that the oceans, lakes, rivers, and 
streams of the world can be virtually infinite sources of clean and inexpensive energy 
for humankind.” (p. x-xi) 
• Translation and introduction by Jed Rothwell 
Introduction has excellent description of an undocumented 1991 event of heat after 
death in Mizuno’s lab 
By far the most significant event of its type, and not successfully repeated 
Heat release continued after electrolysis was stopped for at least 12 days, releasing at 
least 85, and possibly 114, megajoules 
Heat released was 27 times the heat from a mass of gasoline equal to the mass of 
palladium 
Once started, cold fusion “tries” to continue and seeks to equilibrate at a particular 
temperature 
Lily-shaped eruptions at the surface show where hot spots develop in the metal and 
fuse or melt the metal in the process of erupting 
Not only deuterium is involved in the as-yet-unknown reactions, but also the 
palladium, in the transmutation to other elements 
• Mizuno was one of the first to confirm neutron emissions in cold fusion experiments 
• “…this field of research has become a tangled mess.” 
• Most of the book is a discourse of events of the author’s personal experiences with cold 
fusion research 
• Narratives also include attendance at cold fusion conferences in considerable detail 
• Worked with ceramic proton conductors as well as palladium and platinum in electrolysis 
cells 
• The primary significance of this work is the strong evidence of cold fusion and its various 
aspects based on the author’s personal experience. 
Moon, David, Carbon Dating, Cold Fusion, and a Curve Ball – Element Transmutations from 
Cold Fusion – Implications for Radioactive Dating. Victoria, BC: Trafford Publishing, 2004 
Contents 
Acknowledgements 
Preface 
Chapter 1: Cold Fusion: The World’s Energy Future 
Chapter 2: Nuclear Reactions and Radioactivity 
Chapter 3: Rate of decay and the Half-Life 
Chapter 4: Carbon Dating 
Chapter 5: Carbon 14 and the Bubble Machines 
Chapter 6: The Great Thorium Disappearing Act 
Chapter 7: The Flood: a Time of Transmutations? 
Epilogue 
Appendix A: Mathematical Derivation of Equations 
Appendix B: Supplementary Problem Examples 
Resources 
• Not a scientific work – reference on back cover is made to “…extensive element 
transmutations (that) occurred from intense hydrodynamics during the Flood of Noah 
(Genesis 6-8)” 
• Page 22 (Preface): “One catastrophic event in man’s history was the Flood of Noah, as 
described in the Bible in the book of Genesis. Carbon Dating, Cold Fusion, and a Curve Ball 
will explain how it is thought that the monstrous Flood – called the Great Deluge – cold 
conceivably bring about massive amounts of nuclear changes in earth material further 
upsetting the balance of certain elements used to ‘date’ things” 
• The principal meaning or implication of this work is the marginalia that are attracted to cold 
fusion in its current marginalized state 
Nagel, David J. “The Status of Cold Fusion”. Radiological and Physical Chemistry, v. 51, no. 4-
6, p. 653-698 
Contents 
Introduction 
Activities and Documentation 
Possible Outcomes of ‘Cold Fusion’ 
Experimental Summary 
Theoretical Summary 
Related Scientific Puzzles 
Conclusions 

References 
• Recommends research programs in several fields related to cold fusion as being well within 
the scope of mainstream science 
• A way of legitimizing cold fusion research is to conduct it in marginal, related and non-
marginalized fields 
• Provides an excellent summary of events in 1989 and thereafter to about 1997 
• Gives a good review of the conferences and publications on the subject 
• Over 100 reports of anomalous effects of cold fusion experiments 
• Good section on how cold fusion might “come out” 
• Includes rather technical summation of experiments and results 
• Products of cold fusion: heat, nuclear products, radiation 
• “It is…likely…that theoretical understanding will only follow achievement of experimental 
reproducibility” 
• Related fields – hydrogen embrittlement, phases and their dynamics; ion beam experiments 
• Describes implications of “exothermic nuclear reactions at ordinary temperature” 
• Primary implication for Policy Analysis of cold fusion is the well balanced and positive 
approach in a mainstream journal, with good placement of cold fusion aspects alongside 
related fields 
Park, Robert L. Voodoo Science – the Road from Foolishness to Fraud. New York: Oxford 
University Press, 2000. 
Contents 
Preface 
1. It’s Not News, It’s Entertainment 
2. The Belief Gene 
3. Placebos Have Side Effects 
4. The Virtual Astronaut 
5. There Ought to Be a Law 
6. Perpetuum Mobile 
7. Currents of Fear 
8. Judgment Day 
9. Only Mushrooms Grow in the Dark 
10. How Strange Is the Universe? 
• One of the definitive works for the marginalization of cold fusion 
• Uses cold fusion as a prominent (the prominent) example of voodoo science 
• Voodoo science includes several categories – pathological science, junk science, 
pseudoscience, and fraudulent science 
• Good exposition of the limiting role of the laws of thermodynamics (p. 7) 
• “The reluctance of scientists to publicly confront voodoo science is vexing. While forever 
bemoaning general scientific illiteracy, scientist suddenly turn shy when given an opportunity 
to help educate the public by exposing some preposterous claim.” (p. 27) 
• “Andre Gide, the great French moralist, wrote in his journal a half century ago: ‘Man’s 
responsibility increases as that of the gods decreases.’ Every step taken by science claims 
territory once occupied by the supernatural.” (p. 31) 
• Excellent definition of science, and associated rules (p. 39) 
• Langmuir: pathological science – the science of things that are not so 
• Cold fusion is included in the scope of coverage of many marginal and outright bogus 
phenomena outside of, or at the fringe of, science; “guilt by association” 
• Goes well with Bards’ concept of boundary work in the definition and scope of science 
• Claims that Pons & Fleischmann crossed the line from foolishness to fraud when they failed 
to release the results of helium analysis in the palladium electrode (p. 122-123). This claim 
must be (may already be?) answered for legitimacy 
• The overall point of this work is very valid; the question for cold fusion is whether it fits the 
mold into which Park puts it 
1. Does cold fusion violate the laws of thermodynamics? (no more so than the H-bomb) 
2. Should the cold fusion proponents have withdrawn their claims as knowledge grew? 
(as negative evidence emerged, so did confirmatory evidence) 
Peat, F. David. Cold Fusion – the Making of a Scientific Controversy. Chicago: Contemporary 
Books, 1989 
Contents 
1. Thee Utah Bombshell 
2. The Energy of the Sun 
3. Muon-Catalyzed Fusion 
4. The Utah Alternative 
5. Confirmations and Refutations 
6. Cold Fusion: From Sun to Earth 
7. Implications 
Conclusions 
Appendix 1. Radiation and Radioactivity 
Appendix 2. The Utah Fusion Cell 
Appendix 3. The Brigham Young Cell 
• An early work that was published when the “jury was still out” on cold fusion 
• A layman-directed work that begins with a summary of early events after the March 23, 1989 
press conference 
• A simplified description of nuclear energy follows, to provide context 
• A very good explanation of muon-catalyzed fusion (an alternate form of cold fusion) is 
provided 
• Pons-Fleischmann’s discovery is presented, interestingly, as an alternative to muon-catalyzed 
fusion 
• A “novelette” approach is used to describe the Pons-Flieschmann relationship, the Steven 
Jones connection, and the cold fusion cell developed by P&F 
• Relatively easy reading for getting a high-level introduction, but not as well organized as 
other sources 
• The “Implications” chapter, in particular, covers a variety of only loosely related topics in 
somewhat random order 
• The “Conclusions” chapter seems to add little or no value beyond what is covered earlier in 
the book 
• The Appendices are elementary and simplified to the point of not being useful 
Rafelski, Johann and Steven E Jones. “Cold Nuclear Fusion”. Scientific American, v 287 (July 
1987), p. 84-89. 
Contents 
No subsection breakdown 
• This article, published two years before Pons & Fleischmann, was the origin of the term 
“cold fusion”, subsequently transferred 
• The process of fusion is completely different (muon-catalyzed fusion), however, from the 
process proposed by P&F 
• Like the P&F process, muon-catalyzed fusion was initially thought to be a source of very 
low-cost fusion energy 
• “The heat from muon-catalyzed reactions might someday drive turbines for generating 
electricity” 
• “It is now conceivable that cold fusion may become an economically viable method of 
generating energy” 
• However, new problems emerged subsequently (probably the short life of muons in relation 
to the reaction rates, of the energy generating processes), which negated the possibility 
• One of the authors, Jones, was subsequently the primary source of competition that led the 
University of Utah into the hasty conference of P&F on March 23, 1989 
• Jones conducted research on low-temperature fusion as a geochemical process and source of 
heat within the earth, but with little emphasis on the process as a source of fusion energy for 
society 
Rothwell, Jed. Cold Fusion and the Future. Published by LENR-CANR, December 2004. 
Online. Available http://www.lenr-canr.org. Accessed August 2005. 
Contents 
Introduction 
Part I: What is Cold Fusion? 
1. A Brief Description of Cold Fusion 
2. The Ideal Source of Energy 
3. How We Can Make Some Predictions Now 
Part II: How Cold Fusion Will Change Society 
and Technology 
4. Ordinary Technology, Everyday Goods and 
services 
5. Revolutionary Technology 
6. Synergy: Cold Fusion Combined with Other 
Breakthroughs 
7. Patterns of Transformation 
Part III: Some Technologies that will be Changes 
8. Desalination Megaproject 
9. Global Warming 
10. Robot Chickens and Other Prodigies 
11. Mischievous Military Gadgets 
12. Terror Weapons, and Weapons of Mass 
Destruction 
13. The Oil Industry Has No Future 
14. The Electric Power Industry Has No 
Future 
15. At Home with Cold Fusion 
16. Population, Pollution, Problems with 
Land and Agriculture 
17. The Future of Automobiles 
18. The Future of Aircraft, Spacecraft and 
Personal Flying Machines 
Part IV: The Future 
19. Making Things Worse, and What Some 
Pessimists Fear 
20. Unemployment 
21. My Vision of Life in the Distant Future 
Appendix A: Glossary 
Appendix B: Potential Cold Fusion Applications 
Appendix C: Approximate ZSI (Metric System) 
Equivalents 
Sources 
Index 
• Contains a great deal of elementary and mid-level information on cold fusion; intended 
mostly for the uninitiated 
• An imaginative excursion into the impact of cold fusion on human life in the future in many 
different facets of existence 
• In some areas, the imaginative treatment crosses over into political issues and somewhat 
socialistic and humanistic values 
• The work is based on many assumptions, about how cold fusion technology can, and will, 
develop 
• Also, in several areas, projections into the future drifts into fanciful wishful thinking; not 
very realistic 
• But the main message is clear and cogent – if cold fusion “pans out”, its impact will be 
monumental, comparable to the discovery of fire, on human existence 
• The type and scope of impact will depend on what the cold fusion phenomenon turns out to 
be and how useful it proves to be as a compact, efficient energy source 
• Some parts, as well as reflecting personal taste, demonstrates considerable naiveté 
• Serves, as intended by the author, to project a very positive image of cold fusion and its 
impacts on society, at least in part to help reverse resistance and marginalization 
• Compiled in large part from articles previously prepared for Infinite Energy magazine 
• Significance to PA of cold fusion is the favorable vision that it provides under an optimistic 
scenario for the outcome of cold fusion 
Simon, Bart. Undead Science: Science Studies and the Afterlife of Cold Fusion. New Brunswick, 
New Jersey: Rutgers University Press, 2002. 
Contents 
Acknowledgments 
1. Science Studies and Second Sight 
2. The Birth of Cold Fusion 
3. The Cold Fusion Controversy 
4. The Pallor of Death 
5. The Afterlife of Cold Fusion 
6. Tales from the Crypt 
7. A Hauntology for the Technoscientific Afterlife 
Notes 
Works Cited 
• Excellent analysis of the status and difficulties of cold fusion that is very useful for policy 
analysis for the path forward 
• A very important analysis of the status of cold fusion after the 1989-90 course of events; very 
recent publication 
• Despite unfair treatment and excessive marginalization, cold fusion research continued by 
reputable researchers 
• Despite the stigma, lack of resources and rejection for publication, a dedicated few continued 
their efforts 
• Cold fusion events, and continued research, related from a sociological point of view 
(“sociology of science”) 
• Incisive interpretation of the marginalizing events and motivations and the reasons for 
continued dismissal as pathological science 
• Cold fusion is neither fully alive (a subject of mainstream science) nor fully dead (quality 
research continues at the margin); hence undead 
• Excellent source of guidance for defining and evaluating alternatives and mapping the policy 
path forward 
• “…to ignore the operations of the undead is simply to neglect the fact that they will be back 
to haunt us.” 
• Analysis using parallels from the dead and their ghosts 
• Excellent overview in “Summary of Chapters” (p. 20) 
• One of the main factors in determining the outcome – closure – was the core set that got the 
power to make the decisions – nuclear physicists – very significant observation for Policy 
Analysis 
• A different core set may have reached a different outcome 
• Presents what happened to cold fusion from a sociological point of view, which is very 
beneficial for Policy Analysis 
• Two key retractions were particularly harmful – Mahaffey (neutrons) and Martin (excess 
heat) 
• Another key concept – decline in “interpretive charity” – giving the experiments the benefit 
of the doubt 
• “Experimenters regress” occurs when replication is not achieved, controls are not used (or 
are not effective) 
• Closure occurred when core set prevailed in the opinion that cold fusion does not exist 
• Results of closure – death-like measures taken to strangle investigation – resource 
deprivation (funds, labor, time equipment), communication (mainstream publications) 
• “…controversies concerning novel experimental phenomena do not reach closure in the 
logical or rationalist sense of the term.” (p. 89) 
• “Closure is a product of participants’ social and material maneuvers to establish a collective 
sense of what will count as a fact and what will not.” (p. 90) 
• “..knowledge about the nonexistence of cold fusion was stabilized through the 
delegitimization of dissenting actors and the deprivation of resources needed to sustain their 
dissent” 
• Upshot: if the core set was constituted incorrectly, the closure was likely to have been wrong 
Storms, Edmund. A Student’s Guide to Cold Fusion. LENR-CANR.org. Online. Available 
http://www.lenr-canr.org, 2003 Accessed: January 2006. 
Contents 
Foreword 
General Introduction 
Chapter 1. Overview 
Chapter 2. Anomalous Energy Production 
Explanation of the Calorimetric Method 
Anomalous Energy – Electrolytic, Gas Loading, Electrodiffusion, and Sonic Methods 
Chapter 3. Anomalous Nuclear Products 
Introduction 
Nuclear Products – Helium, Tritium, Neutron Production; Energetic Radiation, Transmutation Products 
Chapter 4. Description of the Nuclear-Active-Environment 
Chapter 5. Understanding How Pd Behaves Including Its Relevant Properties 
Introduction 
Properties – Phase Diagram of the Pd-D System; Structure and Lattice Dimensions; Thermodynamic 
Properties; Measurements of the D/Pd Ratio 
Chapter 6. How to Reproduce the Pons-Fleischmann Effect 
Chapter 7. Explanations for the Nuclear Reactions (Theory) 
Introduction 
General Discussion – Role of Neutrons, Phonons, Particle-Wave Conversion, “Strange” Particles, 
Tunneling and Screening, Multi-Body Fusion 
Chapter 8 
Summary 
Comments 

References 
• 
Author’s interest in cold fusion is driven by his own experience in having achieved it at Los 
Alamos in 1991 (and since in his own lab, after retirement?) 
• 
Directed toward an audience with technical training 
• 
Sets forth five (5) key observations: 
1. The effect occurs in the surface of an electrolyzing cathode, not in bulk material 
2. Active material causing the Pons-Fleischmann effect is not β-PdD of any composition, but is a 
complex compound of unknown but high composition and of unknown structure 
3. Nuclear reactions are found to occur in many materials treated in a variety of ways, and not just when 
palladium and deuterium are present 
4. An environment consisting of nano-sized particles is very frequently observed when nuclear effects 
occur 
5. All isotopes of hydrogen can be involved in the cold fusion process 
• 
“Apparently a mechanism exists in a lattice structure that is capable of circumventing any 
Coulomb barrier” 
• 
“These anomalous nuclear reactions require a special environment in which to operate, the 
so-called Nuclear Active Environment (NAE)” 
• 
Nuclear products when measured with anomalous heat show a correlation – helium-4 and 
transmutation both 
• 
“…the nature of the NAE has been difficult to discover because the reactions only occur in 
very small regions that have properties much different from the surrounding bulk material.” 
• 
Four methods of obtaining anomalous energy – electrolysis, gas loading, electrodiffusion, 
and sonic 
• 
Excellent discussion of the three “branching ratios” of nuclear reaction in fusion an dhow 
they are not followed by cold fusion 
• 
Good technical description of the NAE and the behavior of palladium when loaded with 
hydrogen 
• 
Provides a recipe on how to produce the Pons-Fleischmann effect 
• 
Covers the various aspects of theories developed to date – role of neutrons, phonons, particle-
wave conversion, “strange” particles, tunneling, multi-body fusion 
• 
“Skepticism, when carried to extreme, is as damaging as naïve acceptance. At the present 
time, many people respect the skeptic for guarding the high ideals of science. In fact, skeptics 
frequently stop important progress, stifle originality, and turn creative people away from 
science altogether.” 
Storms, Edmund. A Response to the Review of Cold Fusion by the DOE. Unpublished Report by 
Lattice Energy, December 15, 2004, 16 p. Online. Available http://www.lenr-canr.org. Accessed 
October 2005. 
Contents 
Introduction 
Discussion 
Calorimetry 
Prosaic Source 
Chemical Storage of Energy 
Random errors 
Anomalous Element Production 
Helium 
Tritium 
Transmutations 
Radiation and Particle Emission 
General Comments 
Summary 
Suggested Approach to Future Studies 
Potential Implications for the U.S. 
• 
Readily acknowledges the problem of poor or inadequate quality of papers – then blames the 
lack of adequate funding 
• 
Also acknowledges that claims are inconsistent with “accepted knowledge about the well-
known fusion reactions” 
− 
Neutrons and tritium are expected in equal amounts but are not seen 
− 
Instead, 4He is produced, and not with expected gamma ray but with heat instead 
− 
Choice is then to reject out of hand or to accept the experimental observations and 
keep an open mind 
• 
Counters the claim that little has changed since 1989 with a list of five changes 
− 
A claim for anomalous energy production is now based on numerous results using a 
variety of calorimeter designs at many different laboratories world-wide 
− 
Evidence for unexpected nuclear reactions, in addition to fusion, has been reported 
based on emitted radiation and accumulated reaction products 
− 
Reproducibility using certain methods has now increased to significant levels 
− 
A variety of methods can be used to initiate both anomalous energy and nuclear 
reactions of several types 
− 
A rich collection of explanations is now being actively explored 
• 
Lists 70 institutions and organizations that are involved in research in the subject 
• 
“Experimental evidence for claiming a novel phenomenon based on nuclear interaction has 
three sources 
− 
Energy production is measured using a calorimeter; this energy is frequently much 
too large to be produced by normal chemical processes 
− 
Elements are detected after the process that were not detected initially, and cannot be 
explained by some sort of contamination and/or local enrichment 
− 
Radiation of various kinds is emitted when  none should be found 
• 
Provides a detailed discussion of each of the three 
• 
For calorimetry, addresses three basic challenges 
− 
Prove that claimed anomalous (excess) heat energy is not generated by a prosaic reaction 
− 
Prove that this energy is not merely released after it has been previously stored during 
the course of the experiment 
− 
Prove that the Calorimeter is sufficiently accurate and sensitive to reliably measure 
the claimed energy 
• 
For anomalous element production, addresses three kinds of production: 1) 4He; 2) tritium; 
and 3) transmutation products 
• 
For radiation and particle emission, covers alpha, proton, triton, and neutron emissions – 
none are associated with energy production 
• 
Asserts that the Nuclear Active Environment (NAE) is not within the bulk of the palladium, 
but at the surface, and is much more complex than pure metallic palladium 
− 
High D/Pd loading is still required on the substrate to prevent deuterium leakage out 
of the NAE and into the underlying Pd 
− 
Difficult in replication is because NAE creation is difficult and depends on variables 
not understood, let alone controlled 
• 
Use of normal water as a blank is risky because it might be involved in cold fusion reaction 
• 
Refutes the assertion that researchers ignore negative results 
• 
Emphasizes the importance of understanding the nature of the NAE: “…reasons for negative 
results are now much better understood. One logical reason is because the required, unique 
environment was not made. The anomalous effects become reproducible and robust, as 
observed, once this nuclear active material is present. The major unknown at this point is the 
nature of this material and how it can be created more predictably”” 
− 
“…present understanding places the nuclear activity in a thin deposit on the surface. 
This deposit is presently made over a period of time by a random process. 
Examination of surface of an operating electrode by an infrared camera shows 
random hot spots, indicating that only a small fraction of the surface is active. 
Nevertheless, power generation at levels in excess of 5 watts are occasionally 
measured. This means that power density of the active region is very high. In fact, it 
is high enough to cause local melting of palladium on occasion. 
− 
“Once the nature of this active region is understood and can be made in large amounts, 
presumably power density can be increased to any level that is required for an application.” 
• 
“The issue is not whether each and every paper is perfect or that every experiment is without 
flaw. The issue is whether the weight of the evidence shows anomalous and important 
behavior.” 
• 
“The generation of anomalous energy is now much more reproducible than in the past and 
has been shown to be associated with helium generation in some cases. Evidence is 
accumulating showing element production by transmutation…” 
• 
Suggests four major issues as being important for further study 
− 
What is the nature of the NAE and how can it be created? 
− 
What mechanism(s) initiates 4He production and under what conditions? 
− 
What mechanism(s) initiates transmutation? 
− 
What mechanism(s) produces energetic particles and how are they related to fusion 
and transmutation? 
• 
Brings up the important issue of the implications for the U.S. if other countries develop the 
cold fusion phenomenon first due to this country’s inactivity 
Taubes, Gary. Bad Science – the Short Life and Weird Times of Cold Fusion. New York, 
Random House, 1993 
Contents 
Author’s Note 
Prologue: The Press Conference 
Book I: Delusion is the Better Part of Grandeur One: Anomalous  
Chapter 1: The Meltdown 
Chapter 2:The Competition 
Chapter 3: Autumn 1988 
Chapter 4: January and February 1989 
Chapter 5: February 26 to March 15, 1989 
Chapter 6: March 16 to March 23, 1989: The Wager 
Chapter 7: March 23 and 24, 1989: Afterthought 
Book II A Collective Derangement of Minds 
Book III: The Tail of the Distribution 
Epilogue 
Acknowledgement 
Notes 
Interviews 
• A relatively early post-closure work that contributed to the closure and is still widely 
referenced, though quite out of date 
• Written not by a scientist (like Huizenga), but by an informed journalist, who contributed to 
Science magazine; well written and very “readable” 
• Contains enormous, rich detail of the sequence of events, written in a style similar to a novel, 
and with well-researched background on individuals and events 
• The author makes clear his viewpoint early against cold fusion and proceeds to develop his 
case accordingly 
• An excellent work for grasping the cold fusion “story”, if enough effort is put into filtering 
for the explicit bias against cold fusion  
• Work is perhaps most noted for its accusation of fraud at Bockris’ lab at Texas A&M 
regarding tritium measurements 
• Most explanations of individuals and background appear to be quite negative in tone, 
particularly for cold fusion advocates, but for others as well 
U.S. Department of Energy. “Report of the Review of Low Energy Nuclear Reactions”. 
Unpublished U.S. DOE Report, 5 p. December 1, 2004. 
Contents 
Introduction 
Review and Process 
Review Criteria 
Review Document and Presentations 
Detailed Summary of Reviewer Response to Charge Elements 
Charge Element 1: Examine and evaluate the experimental evidence for the occurrences of nuclear reactions 
in condensed matter at low energies (less than a few electron volts). 
Charge Element 2: Determine whether the evidence is sufficiently conclusive to demonstrate that such 
nuclear reactions occur 
Charge Element 3: Determine whether there is a scientific case for continued efforts in these studies and, if 
so, to identify the most promising areas to be pursued. 
Conclusions 
• 
Review conducted by DOE Office of Science 
• 
References the earlier 1989 ERAB review: “…peer review of the experimental data and 
supporting theory since the 1989 ERAB review” 
• 
Includes the Hagelstein et al. 2004 paper prepared for the review as Attachment 1 
• 
Review conducted in two parts 
− 
Nine scientists reviewed Hagelstein et al. 2004 paper and submitted comments 
− 
Nine additional scientist convened on August 23, 2004 for one-day review of 
presentations 
• 
Review Criteria (3) [See Charge Elements below] 
• 
Review paper (Hagelstein et al. 2004) focused on “a subset of research from two areas” 
− 
“selected issues associated with excess heat production in deuterated metals” 
− 
“some aspects of nuclear emissions from deuterated metals.” 
• 
Detailed summaries of reviewer responses presented were prepared by DOE program 
managers – based on the 18 sets of reviewer comments 
• 
Charge Element 1: Examine and evaluate the experimental evidence for the occurrences of 
nuclear reactions in condensed matter at low energies (less than a few electron volts). 
− 
Focused on production of excess heat and “expected fusion products such as 4He 
− 
Regarding excess heat, the reviewers were split on its existence being documented 
  
Effects not repeatable 
  
Magnitude of effect not increased in over a decade of work 
  
Many experiments not well documented 
− 
regarding 4He production, 5 of 16 cases in cells whose excess heat was produced 
claimed 4He 
  
At or close to background concentrations 
  
Contamination cited as one possible cause of false positive results 
− 
“Two-thirds of the reviewers commenting on Charge Element 1 did not feel the 
evidence was conclusive for low energy nuclear reactions, nor found the evidence 
convincing, and the remainder indicated they were somewhat convinced.” 
− 
“Many reviewers noted that poor experiment design, documentation, background 
control and other similar issues hampered the understanding and interpretation of the 
results presented. 
• 
Charge Element 2: Determine whether the evidence is sufficiently conclusive to demonstrate 
that such nuclear reactions occur 
− 
“Reviewers expert in nuclear physics noted that the cold fusion mechanism put 
forward by proponents is not in accord with presently accepted knowledge of D+D 
fusion. 
− 
“The preponderance of the reviewers’ evaluations indicated that charge Element 2, 
the occurrence of low energy nuclear reactions, is not conclusively demonstrated by 
the evidence presented. One reviewer believed that the occurrence was demonstrated, 
and several reviewers did not address the question.” 
• 
Charge Element 3: Determine whether there is a scientific case for continued efforts in these 
studies and, if so, to identify the most promising areas to be pursued. 
− 
“The nearly unanimous opinion of the reviewers was that funding agencies should 
entertain individual, well-designed proposals for experiments that address specific 
scientific issues relevant to the question of whether not there is anomalous energy 
production in Pd/D systems, or whether or not D-D fusion reactions occur at energies 
on the order of a few eV. These proposals should meet accepted scientific standards, 
and undergo the rigors of peer review.” 
− 
“No reviewer recommended a focused federally funded program for low energy 
nuclear reactions.” 
• 
Conclusion 
− 
“While significant progress has been made in the sophistication of calorimeters since 
the review of this subject in 1989, the conclusions reached by the reviewers today are 
similar to those found in the 2989 review.” 
− 
“The current reviewers identified a number of basic science research areas that could 
be helpful in resolving some of the controversies in the field, two of which were: 1) 
material science aspects of deuterated metals using modern characterization 
techniques, and 2) the study of particles reportedly emitted from deuterated foils 
suing state-of-the-art apparatus and methods.” 
− 
“The reviewers believed that this field would benefit from the peer-review processes 
associated with proposal submission to agencies and paper submission to archival 
journals.” 
U.S. Department of Energy. “Report of the Review of Low Energy Nuclear Reactions – 
Reviewers’ Comments”. Unpublished U.S. DOE Report, 45 p. December 2004. Online. 
Available http://www.lenr-canr.org. Accessed October 2005. 
Contents 
Separate section for each of 18 reviews 
• 
Each review has a highly variable format and content, apparently because no guidance was 
provided beyond listing the three Charge Elements  
• 
Generally highly technical and not addressed to lay audiences 
• 
Very narrow in the scope of the evaluations – only strictly technical (as was the intent of 
DOE) 
• 
Therefore not very useful for policy analysis for cold fusion as written, but the outcome in 
the DOE report that is based on these reviews was extremely important 
• 
The identities of the reviewers are not disclosed 
• 
The variety of opinions expressed reflect the continued non-definitive status of cold fusion, 
which means it is still of great interest for continued consideration and development 
References Reviewed But Not Annotated 
Many references were reviewed that were deemed not to be sufficiently relevant to a cold fusion 
policy analysis for the preparation of annotations. In the interest of completeness, and in the 
event that the initial determination of non-relevancy needs to be revised, the list of references 
reviewed but not annotated is provided below. 
Chubb, Scott. “The 2005 MIT Cold Fusion Colloquium, Honoring Eugene Mallote.” Infinite 
Energy Magazine, issue 62. 11 p. Online. Available www.infinite-energy.com/iemagazine. 
Accessed November 2005. 
Jones, Steven E., Franco Scaramuzzi, and David Worledge, eds., Anomalous Nuclear Effects in 
Deuterium/Solid Systems: publisher TBD, 2001. 
Kevles, Bettann H. “When Fraud Wriggles Itself into Science.” Austin American-Statesman 
(January 15, 2006), p. H1, H4. 
Simon, Bart. “Public Science: Media Configuration and Closure in the Cold Fusion 
Controversy”. Public Understanding of Science, v. 10 (2001), p. 383-402 
Toumey, Christopher P. “Conjuring Science in the Case of Cold Fusion”. Public Understanding 
of Science, v. 5 (1996), p. 121-133. 
U.S. Department of Energy, Energy Research Advisory Board. “Final Report of the Cold Fusion 
Panel of the Energy Research Advisory Board.” Unpublished U.S. DOE Report, 61 p. 
November, 1989. 
3 Website Reviews 
One of the salient characteristics of cold fusion as a highly marginalized science is the denial of 
access to normal scientific publication channels for reporting research results. The availability of 
the Internet has consequently proven to be a powerful communications tool both for exchange of 
technical information and as a forum for mutual support among researchers and other interested 
parties. 
Approximately 20 websites have been reviewed that are at least partly dedicated to cold fusion 
promotion and information dissemination. The most significant websites as information sources 
for cold fusion policy analysis are reviewed below. Other websites of secondary interest (and not 
annotated) are listed further down in this section (subsection 3.2). 
Primary Cold Fusion Websites, with Annotations 
A total of about a dozen websites were annotated after being selected during the initial review. 
They are provided below in three parts: 1) name and website address (URL); 2) contents 
(primary webpages, including homepage); 3) annotations of principal contents in “bullet” form; 
and 4) significance of contained information for cold fusion policy analysis, generally as the last 
one to three bullets.  
Copes of the homepages of the selected websites are included in Appendix A. 
Author Unknown. Weird Science: Cold Fusion Links.. Online. Available: 
http://www.amasci.com/weird/wcf.html. Accessed: January 2006. 
Contents 
Webpage of “Weird Research, Anomalous Physics” 
Has “Links to Articles”, “Books” and “CF Websites” on the page 
• 
“Cold Fusion is not normal fusion, so a more appropriate name for it is ‘Low Energy Nuclear 
Reactions’" LENR, or ‘Chemically-Assisted Nuclear Reactions,’ CANR... or CMNS 
‘Condensed Matter Nuclear Science’” 
• 
The links are particularly helpful; among the best collection available 
• 
Links to other sites may be useful for cold fusion policy analysis 
Biberian, Jean Paul, Editor-in-Chief. International Society for Condensed Matter Nuclear 
Science. Online. Available: http://www.iscmns.org. Accessed: January 2006. 
Contents 
Homepage 
Membership 
Search/Site Map 
FAQ 
News 
Siena 
ICCF12 
• 
Motto: Ardet nec consumitur – “It burns but is not consumed”  
• 
Recently formed (March 2004) professional organization to advance the cause of cold fusion 
(now named Condensed Matter Nuclear Science)  
• 
Incorporated in England; has a Memorandum of Association and a full set of Articles of 
Organization 
• 
The “FAQ” section is about the Society (ISCMNS) rather than about cold fusion 
• 
The “News” section is embryonic and promises to be more significant with time 
• 
“Siena” is a brief webpage on the “6th International Workshop on Anomalies in Hydrogen / 
Deuterium loaded Metals”, which took place in Siena, Italy in May 2005 
• 
“ICCF 12 “ is on the “12th International Conference on Condensed Matter Nuclear Science”, 
which occurred in Yokohama, Japan in November and December 2005; little of the substance 
of the conference is included, but an agenda and a link to the conference website are 
provided 
• 
Overall the site appears to be embryonic and may be more useful in the future as the Society 
catches on and gains momentum 
• 
Not a particularly useful site (at this time) for a policy analysis study of cold fusion 
Britz, Dieter. Dieter Britz’s Cold Fusion Bibliography. Online. Available: 
http://www.chem.au.dk/~db/fusion/. Accessed: January 2006. 
Contents 
Homepage: Chemistry Department, Aarhus University 
General Information  
FAQ  
Remarks on recent additions  
New stuff of the last 3 months or so  
Bibliographies  
Conferences  
Unpublished collections (Vince Cate, Terry Bollinger)  
Submission/Publication statistics  
Related site links  
• 
Britz is at Kemisk Institute, Aarhus University 
• 
Cold fusion bibliography has several parts:  
* Books. 
* Articles published in journals; no patents, preprints or conferences here.   This appears in the full form, 
including abstracts, and an abbreviated   form with references and titles only.   This rather large file is 
also provided, broken up alphabetically into 26 smaller files, to make downloading easier. 
* A bibliography, in a slightly different format, of Russian CNF literature, supplied by Dr. V. Filimonov of 
Belorussia. This largely overlaps the main journal articles bibliography, but I have not yet determined 
how much, and how many papers in it I have missed. 
* Patents 
* News, reports, comments in scientific magazine/journals (Nature, Science...) 
* Published articles peripheral to cold fusion (background facts etc) 
* Unpublished writings, preprints, supplied by Vincent Cate, and available from him and (18-Jul-91) a 
collection of palladium hydride references plus abstracts and annotations supplied by Terry Bollinger, 
and copyrighted by him. 
• 
Extensive collection – “Current item counts, 28-Oct-05”: 
Books           28 
Papers        1352 
Comments       282 
Patents        250 
Peripherals    137 
Conf-Procs      27 
• 
A good starting point for cold fusion references; excellent collection, but mostly very 
technical articles 
• 
Shows a sharp decline in the number of cold fusion publications in recent years 
• 
Only one article in “New Stuff” webpage 
• 
“Related Site Links” are few in number and not very useful 
• 
Likely to be a useful resource for  cold fusion policy analysis for surveys of published works 
Cravens, Dennis, and Dennis Letts. Clean Energy Research Group. Online. Available: 
http://www.cerg.org. Accessed: January 2006. 
Contents 
Homepage 
Experimental Approach 
Facilities 
Discussion and FAQ 
Publications 
Links 
Contact Us 
• 
Experimental Approach: “The primary methodologies we have focused on includes a 
materials stimulation environment and a nanotechnology related focus using:” 
− 
Improved Isoperibolic & Calorimetric Approaches 
− 
Investigation of low power Laser based stimulation of LENR  
− 
Investigation of Lightwater Plasma based LENR 
− 
Investigation of Electro-Magnetic stimulation of LENR 
− 
Investigation of RF Stimulation of LENR 
− 
Investigation of Chemically Assisted Stimulation of LENR 
− 
Spectroscopic Surface Studies  
• 
Facilities in Cloudcroft, NM and Austin, TX 
• 
“Discussion” only has links to LENR-CANR and Hagelsteins’s “Cold Fusion” on-line 
journal 
• 
“Publications” has articles by Letts and Cravens, and other articles as well, generally quite 
technical in nature 
• 
“Links” has only a few, generally the most common, linkages 
• 
See the following webpage for info on Letts: http://www.newenergytimes.com/Conversations/Letts.htm 
• 
Website seems not to have been updated much in 2005; mostly 2004 and before material 
• 
Mission: 
Clean Energy Research Group (CERG) is a private energy research and nanotechnology cooperative 
conducting basic research in the physics, chemistry and material science of LENR (Low Energy Nuclear 
Reactions), cold fusion(CF) and condensed matter nuclear science (CMNS). We are a group of academic, 
retired government & independent industry researchers who believe that LENR/CF in its variety of forms 
along with the theoretical science of CMNS can also provide important clues and new approaches in energy 
and materials science related nanotechnology research & development. We believe that someday 
harnessing LENR/CF will provide a source of reliable energy. 
• 
Not (yet) particularly useful to policy analysis for cold fusion; seems to be generally dated 
and does not live up to potential 
George, Russ. D2Fusion, Inc. Online. Available: http:// www.d2fusion.com. Accessed: January 
Contents 
Homepage 
Mission 
Science 
Finance 
In the Media 
Team 
Positions 
Newsletters 
Educational Site 
• 
Appears to be the website of a commercial applications firm headed by Russ George 
• 
Is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Solar Energy Limited of Vancouver, BC 
• 
Mission:  
"In the firm belief that understanding and practically exploiting the mechanisms of solid-state fusion will 
benefit all humanity, D2Fusion, Inc. is committed to developing and delivering practical solid-state fusion 
energy applications that will both help rescue the planet and provide premier investment opportunities." 
• 
Vision: To fulfill this mission, D2Fusion Inc. is designed and determined:  
To become the most effective champion of solid state fusion physics, pioneer its rapid exploitation in 
practical technologies, and engineer marketable applications to immediately benefit society and the 
environment;  
To closely cooperate with leading international science and engineering organizations to accelerate 
methodological insights, technical breakthroughs and commercialized technologies in the field;  
To grow and maintain a highly committed, collaborative and diversely talented professional team to 
support our global goals and activities;  
To craft market strategies for our prototypes, technologies, expertise and intellectual property that 
maximize their societal diffusion, ecological benefits and return on investment. 
• 
Seems not to have been kept very up to date 
• 
“Educational Site” contains useful information 
• 
“Team” describes the apparently highly credentialed members of the company 
• 
Otherwise not a very useful site for cold fusion policy analysis 
Hagelstein, Peter, Editor-in-Chief. Condensed Matter Nuclear Science. Online. Available: 
http://www.rle.mit.edu/phagelstein/. Accessed: January 2006 
Contents (all on one page) 
Homepage 
Manuscripts 
Experimental & Theoretical Papers 
Submitting 
Peer Review Process 
Copyright 
Publication 
• 
Journal Scope: “The journal Condensed Matter Nuclear Science accepts scientific papers of 
high quality that are concerned with subjects including and relating to nuclear processes in a 
condensed matter environment. Papers may focus on the results of experimental studies, 
theoretical studies, or a combination of experiment and theory.” 
• 
“Topics that are of particular interest at present to the community to which the journal is 
addressed include:” 
− 
Temperature increases, power and energy production in metal hydrides and deuterides; calorimetry 
relevant to such experiments  
− 
Correlations, or lack of correlations, between energy production and possible nuclear products  
− 
Materials science issues that are important for the development of nuclear effects in condensed matter  
− 
Electrochemical issues concerning loading, surface chemistry, resistance diagnostics and other issues 
concerning metal hydrides and metal deuterides that relate to anomalies  
− 
Observations of low-level dd-fusion reaction products in metal deuterides  
− 
Charged-particle emission from metal hydrides and deuterides  
− 
X-ray and gamma emission from metal hydrides and deuterides  
− 
Tritium production in metal hydride and metal deuterides  
− 
Production of new elements or isotopes in metal hydrides and metal deuterides; and modification of 
the associated isotopic distributions  
− 
Induced radioactivity in metal deuterides and metal hydrides  
− 
Accelerator experiments on metal deuterides and metal hydrides that pertain to screening and the anomalies  
− 
Screening between nuclei in the condensed matter environment  
− 
Models for nuclear processes in the condensed matter environment  
− 
Other topics considered to be of interest to the community  
• 
Associate Editors 
− 
North America: Dr. Michael McKubre, Director, Energy Research Center, SRI, Menlo Park, CA; 
Professor George Miley, Nuclear Engineering Department, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 
Urbana, IL; Dr. Edmund Storms, retired. Former of Los Alamos National Laboratory 
− 
Europe: Dr. Francesco Scaramuzzi, retired. Formerly of Centro Ricerche Frascati, Italy; Professor Jean 
Paul Biberian, Physics Department, University Aix-Marsielle, France 
− 
Asia: Professor Akito Takahashi, Nuclear Engineering Department, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan; 
Professor Xing Zhong Li, Physics Department, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 
• 
Appears to be a recently formed journal, with pro-cold-fusion editors 
• 
Guidance on preparing professional papers is provided 
• 
Papers are posted on a secure webpage requiring logon (papers@journal.site.) 
• 
Without membership, it cannot be determined the content of the papers or their usefulness to 
a policy analysis on cold fusion; the topics described appear to be very technical 
Kowalski, Ludwik. Ludwik Kowalski’s Cold Fusion Project. Online. Available: 
http://blake.montclair.edu/~kowalskil/cf/00_project.html. Accessed: January 2006. 
Contents 
“About My ‘Learn Cold Fusion’ Project” 
“Links to Cold Fusion Items” 
• 
Kowalski is with the Montclair State University, Upper Montclair, N.J. 
• 
The introductory page (“About….”) provides background on the purpose and motivation for 
the website 
What follows is a set of items posted, more or less regularly, on that web site since October of 2002. The 
items reflect my own process of learning, mostly from articles published by cold fusion researchers. I am 
still not convinced that excess heat, discovered by Fleischmann and Pons, is real or that nuclear 
transmutations can occur at ordinary temperatures. But I do think that time is right for the second 
evaluation of the entire field. I do not believe that extraordinary findings of hundreds of researchers are 
products of their imagination or fraud. Our scientific establishment should treat cold fusion in the same way 
in which any other area is treated. Those who study cold fusion do not appear to be pseudo-scientists or con 
artists. The items on my list are arranged in the order in which they were posted on my web site. 
• 
Includes 274 “items” related to cold fusion and associated phenomena. Sampling: 
1) Introducing Cold Fusion to students.  
2) A typical "cold-fusion" setup.  
3) Three kinds of Cold fusion.  
4) Short biographies of three Cold Fusion Scientists.  
5) Aberration of the scientific methology.  
6) On dangers of "second hand" publishing.  
7) On Pathological Science (N-rays story).  
8) On Burden of Proof in Science.  
9) Scientific Method in Cold Fusion.  
10) A Russian connection.  
11) Bottom Line.  
12) What do physics teachers think about CF?  
13) More about the Russian Connection.  
14) What is pseudo-scientific in this?  
15) Or what is pseudo-scientific in this?  
16) Here is an example of real pseudo-science.  
17) An Italian connection.  
18) Nobel Prize for "cold fusion?"  
19) A French connection.  
• 
A thorough search of all 274 items may turn up information that is useful for a cold fusion 
policy analysis 
Krivit, Mark. New Energy Times. Online. Available: http://www.newenergytimes.com. 
Accessed: January 2006 
Contents 
Homepage 
News 
Conferences 
Conversations 
Links 
Donate 
About 
• 
Probably the ”premier” website on cold fusion, set up and managed by Steven Krivit, trial 
attorney (very articulate in film clip of cold fusion presentation) 
• 
“Original reporting on research in the field of leading-edge energy and power technologies, 
with an emphasis on cold fusion.” 
• 
Homepage has five (5) major sections, each with linked subcategories 
− Cold Fusion Information. For the: General Public; Those with a Science Background; 
General Media; Science Journalists; Science Students and Teachers (quite a bit of 
overlap of articles, etc. in the categories) 
− Special Collections. Lectures, Interviews and Commentary; News and Past 
Newsletters; Conferences and Cold Fusion Sessions; Myths and Reviews 
Misunderstandings; U.S. Department of Energy Cold Fusion 
− Upcoming Events (see “Conferences” webpage) 
− Free “New Energy Times” newsletter 
− Advertisement for Stephen Krivit’s “The Rebirth of Cold Fusion” 
• 
“News” webpage has back issues of “New Energy Times” 
• 
“Conferences” has about a dozen past and upcoming conferences, with links. 
• 
“Conversations” has about 20 documentations of interviews with and presentations by Steven 
Krivit 
• 
“Links” has one of the best guides to other websites anywhere 
• 
“Donate” gives information on where to send contributions to the New Energy Institute, 
Steven Krivit, Executive Director 
• 
“About” has the following mission statement, as well as a biography of Krivit, a listing of the 
Board of Advisors, list of projects, brief intro on cold fusion, and “Appearances.” 
The mission of New Energy Institute is to provide accurate and responsible news and analysis through the 
New Energy Timestm Web site and newsletter and provide the public with educational resources to facilitate 
the progress of new, sustainable and environmentally friendly energy sources.  
Its primary focus is the field of new energy, including cold fusion, also known as condensed matter nuclear 
science. New Energy Institute seeks to advance the development and application of clean energy, 
accessible and affordable for everyone. 
In order to remain a neutral, unbiased and impartial source of news and analysis, New Energy Timestm and 
New Energy Institute Inc. do not conduct their own scientific research, do not invest in or maintain 
ownership in any of the companies or technologies they report on, and do not try to acquire any intellectual 
property rights in the field. 
• 
One of the primary websites for cold fusion policy analysis; is openly favorable in it’s 
approach to the phenomenon. Krivit is one of the foremost cold fusion “champions” 
Mallove, Eugene. Infinite Energy Magazine. Online. Available: http://www.infinite-energy.com. 
Accessed: January 2006. 
Contents 
Homepage 
New Energy Foundation 
Who Are We? 
Apply For Grants 
Donate to NEF 
Infinite Energy Magazine 
About the Magazine 
Subscribe/Renew 
Order Current Issue 
Order Special Issue 
Online Store 
Back Issues Guide 
Read IE Articles 
Author Instrucitons 
Change of Address 
Contact Us 
Advertising 
Resources 
New FAQ 
In the News 
Technical References 
Key Experimental Data 
LENR/Cold Fusion Excess Heat 
Memo to the White House 
Links 
Downloadable PDFs 
Selection of IE Articles 
MIt & Cold Fusion Report 
Magazine Index 
LENR-CANR Papers 
• 
One of the leading websites for promotion of cold fusion and related phenomena 
• 
Apparently started by Eugene Mallove, who was murdered in 2004, and continued by others 
• 
Includes other alternative energy source material, but main focus is on cold fusion 
• 
Self-description of New Energy Foundation, Inc. 
New Energy Foundation, Inc. (NEF) is a non-profit corporation based in the State of New Hampshire. It is 
approved by the IRS as a 501c3 public charity corporation, therefore contributions to it are tax deductible. NEF 
publishes Infinite Energy: The Magazine of New Energy Technology, which has been in operation since early 
1995. NEF also runs a testing laboratory, New Energy Research Laboratory (NERL), to verify or reject claims 
of anomalous performance in particular energy-producing devices brought to its attention. New Energy is the 
term applied to new sources of energy that are currently not recognized as feasible by the "scientific 
establishment," but for which overwhelming and compelling evidence exists in at least three categories:  
1. New hydrogen physics (a.k.a. "cold fusion," more generally Low-Energy Nuclear Reactions or 
LENR, "hydrino" physics, and other water-based energy sources). 
2. Vacuum energy, Zero Point Energy or "ZPE," Aether energy, or Space energy— descriptions of 
vast energy sources from the vacuum state. 
3. Environmental energy, i.e. energy from sensible thermal energy (in particular, energy of 
molecular motion), through significant extensions to the Second Law of Thermodynamics. 
NEF also has a grant-awarding function. It dispenses to outside researchers and developers carefully 
targeted research and development funding grants from NEF's reserves of charitable contributions. 
• 
Primary activity is publication of “New Energy Magazine”, which is available free by 
subscription 
Infinite Energy Magazine has been in publication since March 1995. It is a technical magazine with editorial outreach 
to the general public as well. To maintain the highest editorial standards, it is written and edited by scientists, 
engineers, and expert journalists. It is aimed at pioneering scientists, engineers, industrialists, environmentalists, and 
investors who are concerned about an exciting R&D area that we believe will change the world dramatically. Infinite 
Energy is circulated around the world to over 40 countries. And, Infinite Energy is distributed to newsstands in the U.S. 
and Canada 
• 
Although having a “New Age” component, an extremely valuable source of information of 
cold fusion and related phenomena 
• 
A very important source of information to support a cold fusion policy analysis 
O’Leary, Brian, et al. New Energy Movement. Online. Available: http://www.newenergymovement.org. 
Accessed: January 2006. 
Contents 
Homepage 
The Movement 
New Energy 
Our Team 
Conferences 
Knowledge 
Resources 
• 
Concept (from Homepage):  
New Energy Movement is the public face of a growing scientific and ethical renaissance that represents the 
end of unsustainable energy practices. We are an outgrowth of the now century-old insight that energy is 
not the limited quantity much of orthodox physics assumes it to be. Our efforts are geared toward educating 
the public and governments alike as to the nature and practical application of new energy principles and 
technology.  New Energy Movement envisions itself being a clearing-house and repository of leading-edge 
research, as well as a hub for social activism necessary to the introduction of new energy innovations.  
• 
Initiated August 31, 2005 
• 
Interests represented go far beyond cold fusion 
• 
Not a great deal is present on cold fusion specifically 
• 
Has a strong New Age overtone 
• 
“Knowledge” is primarily statements of O’Leary (former astronaut) and other Directors 
• 
Similarly for “Conferences” 
• 
Appears to have little content of substance that would be useful to a cold fusion policy 
analysis 
Rothwell, Jed. LENR-CANR (for Low Energy Nuclear Reactions – Chemically Assisted Low 
Energy Nuclear Reactions). Online. Available: http://www.lenr-canr.org. Accessed: January 
Contents 
Homepage 
Introduction to LENR-CANR 
News, Links, Download Tally 
A Look at Experiments 
Special Collections 
Library Guide, Downloadable indexes 
Library 
• 
Primary feature is the extensive online library of cold fusion technical papers and other 
resources – over 3000 entries in the database – the best available anywhere. 
This site features a library of papers on LENR, Low Energy Nuclear Reactions, also known as Cold Fusion. 
(CANR, Chemically Assisted Nuclear Reactions, is another term for this phenomenon.) It features a library 
of more than 400 original scientific papers in Acrobat format, reprinted with permission from the authors 
and publishers. The papers are linked to a bibliography of over 3,000 journal papers, news articles and 
books about LENR. 
• 
Homepage also provides three free books and short articles 
− 
A Student’s Guide to Cold Fusion 
− 
Cold Fusion for Dummies 
− 
Cold Fusion and The Future 
• 
“Introduction to LENR-CANR” has sections as follows: 
− 
A Student’s Guide to Cold Fusion (start of text), by Ed Storms 
− 
“It Started in 1989….”, by Peter Hagelstein 
− 
Cold Fusion: What Is It? 
− 
A Science Tutorial 
− 
Technical Introduction to LENR-CANR 
• 
“News, Links, Download Tally” includes articles from the press (most unfavorable) and 
associated responses. Most recently an article by Bethann Kevles 
• 
“A Look at Experiments” provides a number of photos, including cold fusion cells, related to 
the topic 
• 
“Special Collections” includes materials related to the 2004 U.S. DOE review of cold fusion, 
proceedings of ICCF conferences up to ICC  
• 
“Library Guide, Downloadable Indexes”: 
This section contains a guide to the library, and some simple, downloadable indexes — copies of our 
bibliography that you can store on your disk and consult anytime, even when you are not connected to the 
Internet. These are single, stand alone HTML documents, without attachments or graphic images. 
• 
Library Example (more than 3000 entries) 
Adamenko, S. and V. Vysotskii. Experimental Observation And A Possible Way To The Creation Of 
Anomalous Isotopes And Stable Superheavy Nuclei Via The Electron-Nucleus Collapse. In Tenth 
International Conference on Cold Fusion. 2003. Cambridge, MA: LENR-CANR.org. 
• 
Primary significance to a cold fusion policy analysis study is the extensive database of online 
references – readily available for download at no cost 
Storms, Edmund. Edmund Storms’ Cold Fusion Website.. Online. Available: 
http://home.netcom.com/~storms2. Accessed: January 2006. 
Contents 
Homepage 
Photo Page 
Papers by Storms 
An Editorial 
E-Mail Me At 
A Modern Fairy Tale (dead page) 
• 
Website has excellent information on cold fusion in general from a proponent’s viewpoint 
This site is designed to keep you informed about the latest research done on Cold Fusion (CANR) by Dr. 
Edmund Storms. 
• 
Storms Biography 
Edmund Storms obtained a Ph.D. in radiochemistry from Washington University (St. Louis) and is retired 
from the Los Alamos National Laboratory after thirty-four years of service. His work there involved basic 
research in the field of high temperature chemistry as applied to materials used in nuclear power and 
propulsion reactors, including studies of the "cold fusion" effect. Over seventy reviewed publications and 
monographs resulted from this work as well as several books, all describing an assortment of material 
properties. He presently lives in Santa Fe where he is investigating the "cold fusion" effect in his own 
laboratory. These studies have resulted in sixteen presentations to various conferences including the ACS 
and APS. In addition, twenty-one papers have been published including three complete scientific reviews 
of the field, one published in 1991, another in 1996 and the latest one in 1998. A critical evaluation of the 
Pons-Fleichmann Effect was published in 2000. In May 1993, he was invited to testify before a 
congressional committee about the "cold fusion" effect. In 1998, Wired magazine honored him as one of 25 
people who are making significant contributions to new ideas. 
• 
“Articles” on Homepage has many links to other papers and websites with cold fusion 
information 
• 
“Photo Page” has excellent pictures of cold fusion electrochemical cells – best seen 
anywhere 
• 
“Papers by Storms” includes many prior to his interest in cold fusion 
• 
“An Editorial” is an excellent summary of the point of view of cold fusion proponents in the 
face of the marginalization of their field – “When Will We Learn to Listen?” 
• 
Overall, a good source for policy analysis of cold fusion for beginners in the field, with good 
links to more advanced sources 
Cold Fusion Websites of Secondary Interest (without Annotations) 
Cravens, Dennis. Dennis Cravens’ Homepage. Online. Available: 
http://www.netmdc.com/%7Ephysics/. Accessed: January 2006. 
Kozima, Hideo. Cold Fusion Research Laboratory. Online. Available: 
http://web.pdx.edu/~pdx00210/. Accessed: January 2006. 
Author. Alternative Energy Institute. Online. Available: http:// www.altenergy.org. Accessed: 
January 2006. 
Author. EarthTech International, Inc. Online. Available: http:// www.earthtech.org. Accessed: 
January 2006. 
4 Conclusion: A Re-evaluation of Cold Fusion Based on Sound 
Policy Analysis Is Needed 
When considered in total and from a high-level viewpoint, the references and websites reviewed 
and annotated clearly indicate a strong need for re-evaluation of cold fusion both as a major new 
scientific research area and as a potential source of very low cost energy to meet society’s needs. 
The following observations appear to be particularly relevant: 
• 
Many mistakes were made by both proponents and skeptics in the 1989 
announcement and the following weeks. 
• 
These mistakes potentially (or likely) resulted in a premature negative judgment of 
cold fusion on the part of “mainstream science” (and, consequently, policymakers and 
the general public). 
• 
Notwithstanding its highly marginalized state, cold fusion has continued to be the 
subject of high quality research by reputable scientists who disagree with the negative 
judgment. 
• 
The continued research has resulted in findings of excess heat by many researchers 
working with a variety of materials and experimental approaches and in different 
laboratory settings. 
• 
Excess or anomalous heat is the primary experimental finding of research to date, and 
this finding, by itself, warrants a high level of research to determine the mechanism of 
its generation and the development of a sound theoretical explanation. 
• 
The primary mechanism of heat generation appears to be the fusion of two deuterons 
to form helium-4 plus heat that is transferred to the host material (D + D -> 4He + 
heat) 
• 
The above reaction is by far the least common among the three “branching ratios” 
seen in hot fusion, and the excess energy is released in hot fusion not as heat but as a 
gamma ray that is emitted without interacting with the host. 
• 
The excess heat is apparently generated in cold fusion without the harmful radiation 
or nuclear products, that is seen in hot fusion. 
• 
Cold fusion warrants research support not only for its potential as a new source of 
energy but also intrinsically as an exciting new area of scientific investigation 
• 
Since becoming marginalized, cold fusion has become associated with or attracted 
other far less likely (or impossible, in violation of the laws of thermodynamics) low-
cost or unlimited energy schemes. 
• 
Because of the affiliation of cold fusion with even less legitimate areas of pseudo-
science, it can be difficult, especially for non-technical persons, to “separate the 
wheat from the chaff” among articles and, especially, websites. 
• 
Cold fusion marginalization is manifested in denial of funding from conventional 
energy research sources, failure to be recognized as a legitimate research area for 
graduate students (and resulting denial of research labor), and rejection of 
publications by mainstream peer-reviewed journals. 
• 
Because it is neither “fully alive” and a part of mainstream science, nor “fully dead” 
in a way similar to fully discredited and inactive phenomena (e.g., N-rays, 
polywater), cold fusion is accurately portrayed as “undead science” in the sociology 
of science. 
The principal conclusion of the bibliographic and website review is that a new evaluation is 
needed that both incorporates the most recent information and employs a broader, more effective 
method and set of evaluators. A policy analysis study is proposed as the best approach for the re-
evaluation of cold fusion. 
5 Library of Resources 
Most of the resources reviewed in this paper have been collected in hard-copy form and, except 
for bound books, as electronic files. Approximately 15 to 20 bound volumes have been collected, 
and the remaining references are generally printed on 8.5 x 11 paper and filed in manila folders. 
Most of the latter references are also provided as PDF electronic files that are readily read by 
Adobe Reader, which is provided free to the public. A few of the references exist only as 
photocopies from the original book or paper (in part or in whole.) 
The shorthand naming convention for both the bound books and the references in the manila 
folders is the lead author (or all authors) followed by the year of publication. In general, a second 
line on the manila folder tabs is included, with the first words of the title of the article to allow 
ready identification of the resource. Where an author has more than one publication in a year, the 
letters a, b, c, etc. are used after the year, in the order that they were discovered in the literature 
search. 
Appendix A. Homepages of Annotated Websites 
The homepages of websites selected for annotation in Section 3.1 of this report are provided in 
this appendix. These homepages are included to familiarize those conducting a cold fusion policy 
analysis in the future with the internet resources available to support the analysis. Approximately 
a dozen websites were selected for annotation and are included in this collection of homepages. 
