1. BACKGROUND 

In the short period following the announcement of
the Pons-Fleischmann discovery, several centers reported the generation of variable amounts of heat in similar experiments. Other centers reported no heat from the
process. The disparity of heat output has been enormous,
indicating that the controlling experimental parameters
of the cold fusion process are not well understood. Unlike the excess heat, the D-D nuclear fusion has not been
as widely supported or reported. For example, fusion
products initially reported by the original experimenters
were revised downward and early reports of fusion byproducts from other centers were retracted. 

Careful examination of the reported characteristics
of cold fusion revealed outstanding similarities to an esoteric engineering subject: hydrogen embrittlement. This
led to correlation of important properties of the two phenomena, explanation for the enormous disparity in heat
production in cold fusion, and identification of specific
parameters to ignite and control the process. 

Hydrogen embrittlement was studied at length in
the last three decades to understand, theorize, and control a serious cause of premature failure of aerospace
and other structures. The palladium-deuterium system
is similar to the palladium-hydrogen system, with the
heavier deuterium causing slightly greater damage to
metals and alloys than hydrogen. 

Failure of metals and alloys by hydrogen embrittlement is comprised of the initiation, growth, and
propagation of cracks. The interaction of hydrogen with
other hydrogen or metal atoms and residual stresses
locked in during processing and manufacturing introduce forces in the vicinity of the cracks. The lockedin stresses can remain in a metal sample for a long
time, ready suddenly to release mechanical energy by
a variety of mechanisms, including deuterium or hydrogen embrittlement. While only small forces are involved in the process, considerable energies are
exchanged within the metal lattice during the fracture
process. The most significant energy term was identified as the work-of-fracture. 2 The energy to form two
new surfaces in palladium, or other metals, is generally less than 1 J/m 2, while the fracture energy to produce the same new surfaces can be greater than 1 • 10^6
J/m z. Actually, the total fracture work that can be done
within a metal electrode is greater than the heat reported from cold fusion to date. 


2. TEMPERATURE CORRELATION 

It is not clear whether Professors Pons and Fleischmann attempted the cold fusion process at high, intermediate, and low temperatures and whether the
intermediate room temperature was found to be optimum
through tests or not. Maximizing a process, such as cold
fusion, can be done by varying parameters, particularly
temperature. The hydrogen embrittlement database clearly
shows that embrittlement is most severe in intermediate
temperature regions, particularly around room temperature, while the effect is negligible at low and high temperatures. A correlation for this important parameter
appears to exist between cold fusion and the embrittlement of metals by hydrogen and deuterium. 


3. VARIABLE HEAT PRODUCTION 

The amount of heat liberated in cold fusion experiments varied greatly; from more than 4 x 106 J/cm 3 of
palladium electrode volume to no heat at all. Recognizing that the fracture process can be the primary source
of the reported heat clarifies the variation of heat output
and this can be explained by known characteristics of
embrittlement. 

Severity of deuterium attack is dependent on the
crystallographic structure of metals and alloys. The more
open body-centered cubic (bcc) metals are more susceptible to embrittlement than the more closed hexagonal
close-packed (hcp) or face-centered cubic (fcc) metals.
Most metals and alloys, however, are susceptible to hydrogen and deuterium embrittlement to varying degrees,
depending on many complex conditions. 

Consider the effect of hydrogen on the alloys in
Table I. Here, the fracture toughness of precracked specimens was measured 3 in vacuum, molecular, and atomicmolecular hydrogen at the shown pressures. The stress
intensities in Table I were calculated in Ref. 3 from
measured loads. The results show that atomic hydrogen,
molecular hydrogen, pressure, and alloy treatment produce different effects. The results for the titanium samples are of particular importance here. The annealed
titanium (Ti-6A1-4V) samples suffered less strength reduction than the solution-treated samples. Since residual
stresses are greatly reduced by annealing, the embrittlement effect and the work-of-fracture are smaller, and the
liberated heat is minor or absent. 

Professor Pons said that there is "almost no fusion
if the palladium rod is machined, or formed from a larger
block, for instance; only cast palladium, in which the
metal is melted and poured into a form, works" (Newsweek, May 8, 1989, pg. 52). Cast metals are generally
brittle and weak in tension and are, thus, more susceptible to embrittlement and are more likely to release considerable fracture work and heat. 

Also, residual stresses vary across the bulk of the
same ignot after cooling, so that samples from the same
block can exhibit differing degress of susceptibility to
fracture. The work-of-fracture, and the amount of heat
that can be liberated, will therefore vary for electrode
samples obtained from the same ignot or block. This last
observation is amplified by other tests in Ref. 3, where
the effect of hydrogen on similar metal samples was
tested. The results of these tests are shown in Figs. 1 and 2. Here, all the titanium specimens were slightly
affected by the hydrogen environment (Fig. 1). The steel
samples exhibited greater variation in strength reduction
(Fig. 2). If the 26 similar steel specimens were used in
calorimetric tests to measure the amount of heat that can
be liberated through strength reduction and fracture energy, then a normal distribution is observed. No heat
would be obtained from five samples in hydrogen (corresponding to samples in air), one to three experiments
would produce considerable heat (corresponding to samples which failed between 2 and 3 kN), and most of the
tests (14 specimens) would give intermediate results. Other
tests demonstrated variation of ultimate strength of palladium for hydrogen-palladium atom ratios of 0.0 to
0.6, while the reduced ultimate strength remained constant from 0.6 to 1.0 ratios. 4 The release of fracture
energy from the same sample can then vary as the concentration of hydrogen or deuterium in the specimen
changes. 
Fig. 1. The distribution of titanium alloy failure load in air and
hydrogen (reproduced from Ref,, 3). 
Fig. 2. The distribution of steel alloy failure load in air and
hydrogen (reproduced from Ref. 3). 

The heat output of cold fusion appears to correlate
to strength reduction caused by hydrogen or deuterium
environments. The strength reduction was not measured
in cold fusion experiments and the proposed correlation
went undetected. The embrittlement process is complex
and is sensitive to minor deviations in one of many parameters as discussed in the next section. 


4. OTHER CONTROLLING FACTORS 

Correlation of hydrogen embrittlement to the cold
fusion process uncovers an extensive data base to study
the process. Many important characteristics of hydrogen
embrittlement were studied and identified before. For
example, the embrittlement process was found to have
little or no correlation to hydrogen diffusion and the
activation energy for hydrogen diffusion, the effective
radius of the hydrogen electron shell in metals, the effective radius of hydrogen ions and the radius of interstices, the heat of chemisorption, and the activation energy
of desorption, while no correlation, or conflicting results, were reported for hydrogen solubility and heat effects. 3 Other characteristics were carefully tested in the
same reference, including the effects of hydrides and
phase formation in metals, kinetics of hydrogen transport, stress intensity, cyclic loading, strain rates, pressure, and temperature. The inconsistent behavior of
embrittlement in some metals led the author of Ref. 3
to propose that "A correlation with a common parameter
may never be possible." 

Thermodynamics of palladium-hydrogen, -deuterium, and-tritium systems and electrochemical and calorimetric measurements were surveyed and summarized
in Ref. 5. In general, the enthalpy and entropy of PdH, -D, and -T systems were based on the heats of absorption, desorption, formation, and other chemical,
physical, or thermodynamics processes. Correlation of
enthalpies and entropies to the concentration of H, D,
or T in palladium was reported. The study noted that
anomalies exist in the enthalpy measurements of the PdH system, but the substantial work-of-fracture and the
heat that can result from the work were not included. 

On the other hand, the significant energy involved
in the fracture work was reported in other studies, but
these were not correlated to the embrittlement process
or to heat production. In the energy balance for the formation of a crack, Ref. 6 includes the energy of superdisIocation, surface energy, distortion energy, and the
work done in opening a crack. Conditions at the crack
tip, for example, were noted to increase the energy by
a factor of 100 to 1000. 2,6 

The study of crack initiation, growth, and propagation uncovers other intricacies. The severity of deuterium attack on metals and alloys is further influenced
by the microstructure of the material, stress intensity,
method of load application, and whether hydrogen or
deuterium is in the atomic, molecular, gaseous, liquid,
or other states. 

The embrittlement process explains the arbitrary
"ignition" of the fracture process and the ignition of
heat generation from cold fusion. Many microcracks are
introduced into metals and alloys during the manufacturing process. These cracks provide many sites for the
nucleation of other cracks, and the fracture process is
significantly influenced by complex factors acting singly
or in combination. To ignite the fracture process, the
experimenter must know the conditions above plus the
stress concentration at the crack tip, heterogeneity of
deformation, orientation of planar defects, yield and ultimate strengths of the material, and surface and lattice
bond energies. Uncontrolled, this complex composite of
conditions makes the ignition of cold fusion a random
process. 

The capricious behavior of deuterium and hydrogen
embrittlement and, more importantly, the complex conditions required to ignite or maintain the fracture process
explain some of the chaos that surrounded the early attempts to reproduce the results of the Pons-Fleischmann
experiments. The objective of the earlier embrittlement
studies was to minimize the fracture process. The objective of the cold fusion experiments, on the other hand,
is to maximize the same process. Minimizing the embrittlement effect is a complex task, as the engineers who
designed systems to operate in hydrogen or deuterium
environments have already discovered. The same complexity will be present in the effort to maximize the
effect for heat generation from cold fusion. If only one
of the many factors mentioned above is neglected or
miscalculated, then the results will be haphazard and
random. 


5. THE FUSED AND MELTED ELECTRODES 

The incremental heat generation in the PonsFleischmann experiments was correlated to the well-known
discontinuous propagation of cracks in hydrogen and
deuterium embrittlement. 2 In addition to the intermittent
release of energy, Ports and Fleischmann reported that
'% substantial portion of the cathode fused (melting point
1554~ part of it vaporized, and the cell and contents
and part of the fume cupboard housing the experiment
were destroyed,"! in a cold fusion experiment. The sudden release of substantial energy from palladium in the
hydrogen environment can be correlated to the explosive
crack propagation phenomenon. A comparable scene to
the palladium electrode meltdown was seen in titanium,
a similar transition metal, electrode in the early 1970s.
During the study of surface hydride formation on titanium 3
(the same tests in Fig. 1), "in one test run, however, a
violent reaction occurred between the titanium alloy and
the hydrogen environment immediately following the introduction of hydrogen into the chamber. This reaction
continued for approximately 3 rain, ejecting material
continuously, with a resulting crater .... " A photograph of the crater is reproduced from Ref. 3 in Fig. 3.
Also, "Similar observations have been made at room
temperature in columbium and in tantalum where severe
fragmentation has been observed as the result of hydride
formation originating at a thermocouple attachment"
(ibid). 

The resemblance of these embrittling phenomena to
the Pons-Fleischmann palladium electrode meltdown is
apparent. The explosive crack propagation results from
the short-time release of the significant fracture work,
or energy. 


6. OTHER RELEVANT CORRELATIONS 

I found other characteristics of the cold fusion process
which are analogous to features in hydrogen embrittlement. Whereas initially it was reported that heat generation occurs only with deuterium, and not hydrogen, it 
has already been reported that hydrogen produced a similar, though smaller, effect. This compares with the slightly
greater effect of deuterium, than of hydrogen, on the
fracture of metals and alloys. And whereas it was not
clear at the outset whether heat can be liberated from
materials other than palladium, it has already been reported that heat was liberated from titanium and nickel
alloys in similar experiments. These and other alloys are
susceptible to embrittlement, crack initiation and propagation, release of varying amounts of fracture work,
and hence, heat. Also, the need for an electric current
to enhance the "fusion" process inside of the electrode
bulk was proposed, but it has already been reported that
the phenomenon is reproduced without an electric current. While hydrogen or deuterium may be introduced
into the bulk of metals during processing steps, these
atoms are transported onto the surface through physisorption or chemisorption and are then diffused into the
bulk, in time and without the need for an electric nudge,
where they cause embrittlement. There are other characteristics of cold fusion which correlate directly with
similar characteristics of the embrittlement phenomenon,
such as the delayed start of heat generation, the incremental release of heat, and others. The similarities between the two phenomena are indeed many. 


7. ENGINEERING DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS 

The cold fusion phenomenon leads to new vistas
for scientific research and study. The reported phenomenon should also rejuvenate understanding of hydrogen
and deuterium embrittlement in the design of modern
engineering systems. The prevailing practice in the design of spacecraft, aircraft, rockets, and other systems
is to analyze the loads, deflections, stresses, strains, fatigue, and other parameters in the system, with little
attention given to the energy exchanges in materials and
structures. 

My two papers, in this journal, illustrate the critical
role of energy exchanges in engineering materials and
structures. The random behavior of hydrogen- and deuterium-induced cracks and the sudden release of the large
fracture energy can lead to premature failure of an aircraft wing or hull, or the unexpected breakdown of a
spacecraft. Engineering systems are designed to positive
safety margins, but some of these systems experienced
occasional premature failures in the last few years. In
most instances, the positive safety margins are based on
loads, stresses, and strains. Hydrogen and deuterium,
and other corrosive elements, are abundant in the environment, and many lightweight systems may have to be designed on the basis of the significant energy exchanges
identified in my papers to avert major accidents. 


8. COMMERCIALIZATION--ENERGY STORAGE DEVICES 

During the congressional hearing on the cold fusion
phenomenon, 9 the Utah experimenters proposed that heat
generation from the calorimetric process can be made
continuous by circulating deuterium in calorimetric cells
in a closed system. As I proposed in my papers, heat
generation is dependent on the fracture of the palladium
electrodes in the deuterium environment and, hence, circulation of deuterium into the all-cracked Pd electrodes
cannot continue the heat process. 

The capacity of the Pd-D system to liberate heat is
significant, 1,2 and the process will be useful for energy
storage devices for use in space systems and in remote
terrestrial locations and for special applications. This is
evident from a comparison of the heat content of coal,
less than 10 kcal/cm 3, with the more than 1,000 kcal/
cm 3 (the 4 MJ/cm 3 liberated in the Pons-Fleischmann
experiments) that can be released from a comparable
metal cube. While fine control of embrittlement is complex as described in this paper, some basic parameters
can be monitored to control the initiation and suspension
of the process. For example, the fracture process is greatly
dependent on the microstructure of the electrode material
and the strain rate. Carefully applied external forces can
be used to alter (start or stop) the fracture process by
changing the microdistances within the lattice. 8


9. ENVIRONMENTAL CONSIDERATIONS 

The enormous heat that can be liberated by the fracture of metals may have a detrimental effect on local
and worldwide environments. Massive piles and large
storage fields of discarded cars, planes, trains, and other
metal structures can be a source of enormous heat in
concentrated locale. Such stockpiles were introduced
around major cities in the last half century and their heatgeneration impact on local and world environment may
have gone undetected to date. The seriousness of the
problem is demonstrated below. 

Cast iron, heavily used and discarded in the last
century, is susceptible to corrosion by environmental hydrogen, deuterium, and, most importantly, salt seawater
and other agents. Approximation of the heat generated
from a stockpile of discarded cars indicates that the metal
piles may act as small, but invisible, volcanos. If 1 cm 3
of cast iron produces 0.4 MJ, i.e., 10% the heat released
from cast Pd, then the heating effect can be calculated.
The corrosion of 100,000 cars can produce more than
5x1015 J. If the cars corrode in 100 years, then the average daily heat release from the pile is 1.37 x 1011 J.
When the corrosion rate is accelerated by stresses due
to daily thermal cycles and other factors, the amount of
heat that can be liberated from the exposed metal can be
enormous. While these values are small on a global scale,
their effect can be noticeable in major cities, such as,
Los Angeles, Baltimore, and Houston. When the weather
is hot and stagnant in these or other cities, the heat production from the discarded metal can intensify and
strengthen the stagnation effect. Such effects on local
weather can be studied by charting temperature variations around major cities from Earth Resources Satellites
and other weather systems. 


10. CONCLUSION 

This paper is a synopsis of notes from a 3-day course
on the subject. The mainly qualitative description briefly
demonstrates discernible correlations between the cold
fusion process and the hydrogen or deuterium embrittlement of metals and alloys and identifies important parameters to control the ignition and release of heat from
the process. 


REFERENCES

1. M. Fleischmann and S. Pons, Electrochemically induced nuclear
fusion of deuterium, J. Electroanal. Chem. 261, 301 (1989).
2. A.F. AbuTaha, Cold Fusion--The Heat Mechanism, Proceedings
of the Workshop on Cold Fusion Phenomena, Santa Fe, N.M.,
May 1989. Also, J. Fusion Energy, 9, 3, 345-349 (1990).
3. H. G. Nelson, The Kinetic and Mechat, ieal Aspects of HydrogenInduced Failure in Metals, NASA TN D-6691, Washington, D.C.,
1972.
4. R. J. Smith and D. A. Otterson, Some Tensile and Electrical Resistance Properties of Palladium-Hydrogen and Titanium-HydTvgen Systems, NASA SP-227, Proceedings, Aerospace Structural
Materials, Cleveland, Ohio, Nov. 1969, pp. 269-278.
5. R. P. Santandrea and R. G. Behrens, A Review of the Thermodynamics and Phase Relationships in the PaUadium-(Hydrogen, Deuterium, Tritium) Systems, Freund, 1986.
6. P. Haasen, Physical Metallurgy, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, 1986, Chaps. 5 and 12-14.
7. G. E. Dieter, Jr., MechanicalMetallurgy, McGraw-Hill, New York,
1961, Chaps. 7 and 14.
8. A. F. AbuTaha, Anatomy of Failure Mechanisms in Aerospace and
Defense Systems, Course Notes, George Washington University,
Washington, D.C., Feb. 1989.
9. Congressional Hearing, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, On Recent Developments in Fusion Energy Research,
Washington, D.C., Apr. 26, 1989. 
