Introduction 

Impurities on the cathode surface are expected to exert an influence on the ability of cathodes to 
attain D(H)/Pd ratios near unity and to retain this high loading for the time required to obtain 
excess heat. For example, Pd (and Pt) are the most efficient electrocatalysts for promoting 
reduction of D2O and H2O to form D2 and H2. The presence of other impurities would reduce the 
rate of this reaction (depending on the impurity, this could amount to many orders of magnitude). 
In addition, the ability to promote the dissociation of D2 to form an adsorbed deuterium atom (D) 
and, subsequently absorbed D, could be reduced by the presence of surface and bulk impurities. 
The presence of Pt, a common contaminant found in Pd, could also be deleterious to obtaining 
high loadings since Pt is also an excellent recombination catalyst for the reaction: Dads + Dads = 
D2. Since absorbed D is known to occupy interstitial positions within the Pd lattice, impurities, 
especially those of the lighter elements, can block these positions. For example, C atoms can 
penetrate into the Pd lattice if exposed to C-containing gases at moderate temperatures1 (as might 
occur during processing). Interstitial solid solutions up to PdC015 can form which can totally 
block the formation of β-PdH which develops at H/Pd = 0.65 and is a precursor phase to the 
attainment of high loading. B, which also enters the Pd lattice interstitially, is known to totally 
block β-Pd-H formation at a concentration of 16 atomic%2. Blockage of Η atom ingress by the 
presence of high concentrations of C and Β in the Pd lattice could also be caused by the 
formation of carbides and borides of Pd. B, at concentrations less than 10 at.% where borides do 
not form as indicated by the Pd-B binary phase diagram, will promote Η absorption due to the 
expansion of the Pd lattice caused by the presence of B3. Thus, smaller amounts of interstitial 
impurities could actually exert a positive influence on the attainment of high loadings. 


Experimental 

The XPS spectra were recorded with a Surface Science Laboratories Model SSX-301 system 
utilizing a monochromatic Α1 Kα source. Survey scans from 0 to 1000 eV binding energy were 
recorded at a 100 eV pass energy. Sputtering was accomplished with a Perkin Elmer 
differentially pumped ion gun utilizing 3 kV argon ion beam at 20 mA emission current and a 
3x3 raster. Base pressure of the main chamber and fast entry chamber was 1x10-9 torr and 1x10-7
torr, respectively. In order to preserve the vacuum in the main chamber on occasion it was 
necessary to pump on the sample in the fast entry chamber overnight to remove the remaining 
absorbed D or H. A description of each sample examined can be found in the text and figure 
captions. A complete description of sample processing and electrochemical history can be 
obtained from the authors. 


Results and Discussion 

XPS of Unused Cathodes: 
A survey spectrum of a Johnson-Matthey 99.9% purity wire as received is shown in Figure 1A. 
Even though the Pd 3d doublet is clearly visible the surface is composed mostly of carbon and 
oxygen due to the large difference in peak area sensitivity factors (Pd3d5/2=9.48, C1s=1.00, 
O1s=2.93). Si, Cl and Mg are also present but to a much lesser extent than C and O. This is a 
representative spectrum for all cathode materials examined which included NRL Pd and Pd-B 
rod, Engelhardt #3 and Johnson-Matthey ‘special batch’ rods from SRI, Goodfellow 99.95% and 
99.99+% wire, and Johnson-Matthey 99.9% and 99.997% wire. In all cases the principal 
contaminants were always C and Ο and the Pd 3d doublet was always visible. The Cls peak was 
in all cases anywhere from approximately ½ to double the height of the Pd 3d doublet. This puts 
the contamination level of all surfaces easily in excess of 50 at.%. Other minor contaminants 
found included S and Na. On the surface most of the elements as determined from their binding 
energy were in the oxidized state except for C which appeared to be graphitic (B.E.=284.0eV). 
Sample preparation such as vacuum annealing and acid etching in aqua regia did not appear to 
significantly alter the surface composition. These data illustrate the ability of the Pd surface to 
become significantly contaminated upon exposure to air and water. 

Most of the contamination observed in Fig. 1A is found to reside in approximately the top 10Å 
as illustrated in the survey shown in Fig. 1B obtained after a 10s argon ion sputter (sputter rate 
lÅ/s for SiO2). Most of the original C and Ο have been removed and the Pd peaks now dominate 
the spectrum. An additional 20s sputter produces a further reduction in contaminant levels (see 
Figure 1C) although the effect is not as dramatic as that observed with the initial 10s sputter. 
Figures 1B and C also indicate the presence of Pt in this sample. This agrees with the GDMS 
results for this material which showed the presence of 1100 ppm Pt impurities. In the samples 
sputtered for longer than 30s, all the impurities were removed except for C (and Pt for 99.9% 
purity Pd). C would persist to the deepest levels indicating that it either was a bulk contaminant 
or that it diffused from the surface to the bulk during processing.

XPS of Used, Non-heat Producing Cathodes:
The data for NRL-processed Pd cathodes is divided into two groups based on the XPS results. The 
first group comprises the thickest overlayers containing large concentrations of both Cu and Pt 
relative to Pd. The Cu and Pt can either be near the surface or buried under a silicate-containing 
overlayer. All of these samples were electrolyzed for approximately 1000 hrs. The second set of 
samples all contained thinner overlayers than the first with very little Cu. A high Pt concentration, 
however, was found on all of these samples. These samples were all electrolyzed for 500 hrs. or less 
and they received a large number (6) of cathodic-anodic current reversals. 

Figure 2 is a series of survey spectra taken from the surface and various depths of an NRL Pd plate 
electrode. The following elements are found at the surface: Si, O, C, Cu, Nb, Pt, Zn, Na, Mg and Ca. 
The Zn, Mg, Ca and Na appear to be ubiquitous in small quantities to nearly all the samples 
examined by XPS. Several examples of much higher Ca concentrations also have been found. ICP 
analysis of the D2O and the LiOD electrolyte before and after electrolysis show the presence of Na 
and Ca (before electrolysis: 0.00-0.07 ppm Ca, 0.01-0.30 ppm Na; after electrolysis: 0.00-0.18 ppm 
Ca, 0.16-2.53 ppm Na). No Zn or Mg above 0.01 ppm, however, was observed in any solution 
making their source uncertain. Nb is found on all samples in which a Pt-clad Nb mesh was used as 
the anode. Nb is exposed to the electrolyte at all points where the material has been cut and at spot 
welds where damage to the Pt film can occur. The Cu (its potential source will be discussed later) is 
found to be in the +2 oxidation state as is indicated by the two sets of 3p doublets occurring between 
930 and 970 eV. Due to their small area sensitivity factors, the major components of this surface are 
O, Si and C. Besides Cu (which has a sensitivity factor similar to that of Pd and Pt), the oxygen is 
also associated with both C, as evidenced by the small shoulder on the high binding energy side of 
the Cls peak, and Si. The binding energy of the Si peaks is indicative of the presence of a silicate-
type species. The bulk of the C detected on the surface is merely the so-called ‘adventitious’ carbon 
contamination found on all air-exposed surfaces. No Pd is evident on the surface. In fact, Pd is not 
detected until after approximately 150s of sputtering and even then the Pd 3p3/2 peak is only a small 
shoulder on the Pt 3d3/2 peak. The Pd peak does not become easily discernible until somewhere 
between 360 and 600 seconds of sputter time. As sputtering proceeds both Cu and Pt, which were 
just observable on the surface, increase as the quantity of silicate species slowly decreases. The Cu 
and Pt reach a maximum after about 600s of sputter time and then decrease as the amount of Pd 
increases. After 1500s both Cu and Pt are still present which indicates that a relatively thick 
overlayer has grown on this electrode. 

Figure 1. XPS survey spectra obtained from a 1-mm diameter Johnson Matthey 99.9% purity 
palladium wire (#010280, Lot K11C06). A: Surface, B: After 10-sec. sputter, see: After 30s sputter. 
Scans from 0 eV (right) to 1000 eV (left) binding energy. 

Figure 2. Series of XPS survey spectra obtained at various total sputter times from a large grain 
(600μm), 99.99% purity Pd plate cathode, 3.5x0.7x0.07cm thick, etched in aqua regia after spot-
welding of Pt resistance wires using Pd/Pd-Ag welding tips, Pt-clad Nb mesh anode, pyrex cell, 
0.1 Μ LiOD (Li from Johnson Matthey, D2O from Ontario Hydro), 980 hrs. total electrolysis 
time, highest current density=370 mA/cm2. Scans from 0 eV (right) to 1000 eV (left) binding 
energy. 

Figure 3. Series of XPS survey spectra obtained at various total sputter times from a large grain 
(600μm), 99.99% purity Pd rod cathode, 3.5 cm long by 0.4 cm in diameter, etched in aqua regia 
after Pt resistance wires attached by spot-welding with Pd/Pd-Ag electrodes, Pt mesh anode, 
pyrex cell, isoperibol calorimeter, 0.1 Μ LiOD (Li from Johnson Matthey, D2O from Ontario 
Hydro), 460 hrs. total electrolysis time, highest current density=455 mA/cm2. Scans from 0 eV 
(right) to 1000 eV (left) binding energy. 

An example of a surface containing a thin overlayer after electrolysis is shown in Fig. 3. The 
surface contains silicate along with C and Pt. No Cu or Pd is observable in the first survey 
spectrum. After removal of much of the surface C contamination with a 10s sputter etch Pd is 
observed along with a significant increase in Si, Ο and Pt. Further sputtering removes the silicate 
with a concomitant increase in Pd. After 180s the Si has all been removed but Pt is still present. 
The Pt 4f signal decreases until after 600s where it is just barely discernible above the noise. 
Compared to the final spectrum shown in Figure 2 obtained at 2.5 times the total sputter time for 
this sample, it is easy to observe that the film on this electrode is much thinner. In addition, Cu 
never becomes a significant component of these types of films. 

Film thickness appears to correlate with total electrolysis time. In addition, composition with 
respect to Cu is very different between the two different types of electrodes. Interestingly, there 
also appears to be a correlation with the maximum D/Pd obtainable. The thinner, non-Cu-
containing overlayers reached loadings of D/Pd = 0.7 while the thicker, Cu-containing overlayers 
were found on samples with D/Pd = 0.94. This indicates that the development of these Cu-rich 
layers at long electrolysis times may, in fact, have been beneficial to obtaining high loadings by 
acting as a blocking agent to D egress from the Pd lattice. The quest for low levels of excess heat 
with more sensitive calorimeters than used in our studies might have proven very interesting with 
these samples. 

Alluded to in the above discussion are the sources of some of the impurities. Si most certainly 
comes from the etching of the PyrexR or quartz container by the concentrated LiOD or LiOH. 
ICP analysis of the used solutions indicated that Si was present anywhere from approximately 30 
to 80 ppm in the experiments where PyrexR containers were used while around 10-20 ppm were 
found for experiments conducted in quartz holders. The source of Pt, found on every electrode 
examined with XPS, was likely from oxidation of the Pt anode at high current density. ICP 
analysis, however, showed less than 0.1 ppm Pt in all solutions. Another possible source was the 
Pd itself since most Pd used contained above 30 ppm Pt. Only one very high purity Pd sample 
containing a very small Pt level was examined: Johnson-Matthey 1mm diameter wire, 99.997% 
purity, where Pt by GDMS=1.9 ppm5. XPS indicated that very little Pt was present on this 
electrode. 

A similar argument applies to the Cu except that, unlike Pt, there is no single solid source of Cu 
exposed in the cell. Sources of Cu include: D2O, Li used to make LiOD from the D2O, spot 
welds where Cu-containing tips are used, the Pt anode, the Pd cathode, PyrexR or quartz and the 
TeflonR used for the cell top and to shield the electrical connections. The PyrexR, quartz and 
TeflonR seem unlikely candidates to supply such large amounts of a metallic impurity. The spot 
welds are unlikely as Cu was found on several cathodes where the welding tips were made of Pd 
and Pd-Ag alloy rather than Cu. Also, the cathodes were always acid etched after spot welding 
was completed. The Li was reported to have 20 ppm of Cu but so little is used to make up the 
0.1M concentration that there is not enough present to supply such large amounts of Cu 
assuming the surface of the cathodes are uniformally covered. The Li was also reported to 
contain 90 ppm of Na and 78 ppm of Ca; these could have been the source of those impurities 
often found in small quantities on the cathode surface. The D2O was not the source as believed in 
an earlier study4. Extremely pure D2O was provided by Ontario Hydro in which the Cu 
concentration was less than 0.005 ppm; our ICP analysis indicated that there was less than 0.01 
ppm in both the D2O (Ontario Hydro and Cambridge Isotope) and the 0.1M LiOD. The Pt anode 
could be the source but GDMS analysis of one anode indicated that only 0.25 ppm Cu was 
present. A Pt anode was examined by XPS after an experiment and no Cu was observed on its 
surface. The final source is the Pd cathode itself. The NRL Pd material was found to contain 24 
to 27 ppm Cu which was likely obtained from arc melting of the sponge which was conducted on 
a Cu hearth. Calculations indicate, assuming surface segregation of the bulk Cu, that this is 
enough Cu assuming uniform distribution in the bulk (verified by depth measurement made with 
GDMS) to provide concentrations found in the surface films observed on used cathodes. Two 
cathodes which produced high Cu were reground and polished on a lathe. High Cu was found 
again re-observed on both cathodes after electrolysis. In addition, a higher than usual Ca level 
found on one of the cathodes was repeated after repolishing and electrolysis. One of the ‘high 
Cu’ cathodes was examined by GDMS as a function of depth. Cu was found at a concentration of 
nearly 80 ppm throughout the entire sample suggesting that initially this NRL sample had a 
larger than average Cu content. Cu was also found on an NRL Pd rod electrode tested at SRI in a 
degree of loading experiment. Cu was found on a 99.9% purity 1mm Johnson-Matthey wire 
which contained 24 ppm Cu by GDMS. Little Cu was found on two NRL samples run at China 
Lake. A number of different chemicals, however, were added to the electrolyte in an attempt to 
increase D uptake. These may have had an influence on Cu mobility. One anomaly, however, 
does exist and this is the large Cu concentration found on a 99.997% purity Johnson-Matthey 
wire cathode. GDMS indicated that this material contained only 0.11 ppm Cu. Electrical 
connections to this cathode were made, however, with Cu spot welding tips. Even though these 
cathodes were acid etched after spot welding, perhaps some Cu remained behind. 

Surface segregation of various elements during Η or D absorption has been observed previously. 
Surface enrichment of ppm bulk contaminants Ag and Rh has been detected with Pd electrolysis 
in both H- and D-based acid electrolytes7. The room temperature segregation of La has been 
observed in the hydride battery material LaNi58. Running the electrode through charge-discharge 
cycles causes the La to diffuse to the surface where it is oxidized by the KOH electrolyte. The 
La(OH)3 blocks Η ingress and reduces the efficiency of the battery. Normally La mobility in the 
LaNi5 lattice is practically zero at room temperature. The authors believe that the enhanced La 
mobility is caused by the severe distortion at the boundaries of the hydrogen-rich and hydrogen-
poor regions which arise during charging and discharging. The severe lattice defects occurring 
over relatively large areas cause short circuit diffusion paths for the La atoms. The same type of 
mechanism could account for the enriched Cu and Pt surface layers found on used Pd cathodes. 


XPS of Heat-Producing Cathodes:
Two sources of heat-producing cathodes, NAWC at China Lake and SRI International, provided 
samples for XPS analysis. Only analysis of the SRI cathode will be described here. The SRI Pd 
cathode examined was sample number P15, a Pd rod made from Engelhard #1 material which 
was SRI’s most successful heat-producing material. This sample was annealed and electrolyzed 
in 1991. Details of the P15 experiment have been published9. From ICPMS data provided by 
SRI, the Engelhard #1 Pd is of 99.9% purity containing 140 ppm Pt and 13 ppm Cu plus 
significant levels of many other impurities. Heat-producing electrodes from China Lake10
examined by XPS include: Johnson-Matthey high purity wires electrolyzed in two different 
calorimeters, NRL Pd rod and NRL Pd-B alloy rods. 

Shown in Figure 4 are a series of survey spectra taken of the surface of the SRI P15 cathode and 
after various sputter times. The surface is a mixture composed of carbon- and oxygen-containing 
species of which silicate is the most prevalent. Small amounts of Pt, S, Zn, Na and Ν are also 
seen. No Pd is present on the surface. After a 10s-sputter some silicate is removed which results 
in a small increase in the C1s signal and a large increase in the Pt4f doublet. After 30s the Si is 
nearly all removed, the C begins to decrease, and the Pt and Pd continue to increase. Cu is also 
visible now. After 60s the metallic impurities, Cu and Pt, reach their maximum while C 
continues to decrease slowly and Pd increases. Further sputtering continues to uncover the Pd 
while the other impurities decrease. After 900s total sputter time, only Pt and C impurities are 
still visible. These are contaminants which are likely part of the bulk. As evidenced by the peak 
binding energies, the carbon always appeared to be mostly in the graphitic state while the Pt, 
even on the surface, was in the metallic state. The profile does not look all that different from 
that obtained for relatively thin overlayer samples tested at NRL and depicted in Figure 3. The 
P15 electrode was loaded to a maximum D/Pd of 0.99 and it produced anywhere from 5 to 10% 
excess power over the total input power. These amounts were just below the sensitivity of the 
NRL isoperibol calorimeters. This fact makes trying to draw conclusions based on the XPS 
results as to what impurities are necessary on the surface to obtain high loadings and excess 
power very difficult. Also, at the end of SRI’s experiments, they normally switch the potential on 
the cathode so that an anodic current is flowing in order to de-load the sample before removal 
from the cell. This could oxidatively remove certain species from the overlayer that normally 
would have been present. 

Several observations can be made concerning excess heat-producing electrodes. All contain 
layers on part or all of the electrode which are relatively thin in the sense that Pd is either 
observed on the surface or very early in the sputter profile and the peaks due to Pd rise rapidly 
with continued sputtering. Pt is always visible on the surface of these electrodes. The electrodes, 
with the exception of the high purity Johnson-Matthey used at China Lake (2.2 ppm Pt by 
GDMS), generally have a large Pt impurity concentration in the bulk. Pt and Pd are in the 
metallic state when found on the surface. A silicate layer is observed on the surface but this can 
be sputtered away fairly rapidly. There is usually a graphitic component to the carbon which 
appears to extend, along with the Pt, into the bulk. Copper is a small impurity as are Zn, Na, Ca 
and Mg. Many of these observations can also be made for the cathode materials run at NRL. 
Since, however, the excess heat observed in the analyzed samples generally did not exceed 10% 
of the input power and the sensitivity of the NRL calorimeters was in the range of 10% and 
above, using the XPS data for NRL-run samples as representative of non-excess heat producing 
electrodes may not be correct. As a final note, many of the impurities found in the surface layers 
are also present in the bulk of the cathode at the ppm level. Certainly the source of all the 
impurities found on the surface is not the bulk: however, as discussed above there is data to 
suggest that loading and de-loading Η-storage materials can greatly increase the room 
temperature diffusion rates of bulk elements. 


Conclusions 

1. Prolonged electrolysis at high current density in basic solution results in the formation of a 
relatively thick layer on the cathode (>1000Å) composed of a varied elemental composition 
with very little or no Pd identifiable on the surface. 20 different elements have been 
identified from XPS analysis of over 30 different electrode surfaces. Cationic, anionic and 
organic species in the electrolyte have been detected as part of these surface overlayers. The 
anodes, however, remain relatively film-free. 
2. The source of some of the elements found in the cathode overlayer may be bulk diffusion of 
impurities such as Pt and Cu caused by the severe lattice distortion produced by absorption of 
large quantities of D or H. 
3. Longer electrolysis times (~1000 hrs.) produced thicker films on NRL Pd cathodes compared 
to shorter times (<500 hrs.).   In addition, the thicker films contained larger quantities of both 
Cu and Pt relative to Pd and in general higher loadings were obtained with these films 
present. This suggests that thicker films may help block the egress of D from the Pd lattice. 
4. Thinner films where Pd was present at or near the surface were found on excess heat 
producing electrodes obtained from SRI and NAWC (exceptions are where large quantities 
of certain species were added to the electrolyte to prolong or initiate excess heat formation). 
Very little copper was found in these films but appreciable amounts of Pt were present.  Thin 
films with low Cu content may be necessary for excess heat measurement. 

Figure 4. Series of XPS survey spectra obtained at various total sputter times from an SRI excess 
heat producing Pd rod cathode (#P15, Engelhardt #1 Pd). Scans from 0 eV (right) to 1000 eV 
(left) binding energy. 


References 

1. S. B. Ziemecki, G. A. Jones and D. G. Swartzfager, “Coexistence of Hydrogen and Carbon 
Solutes in the Palladium Lattice”, J. Less-Common Metals, 131 (1987) 157-162. 
2. R. Burch and F. A. Lewis,” Absoption of Hydrogen by Palladium + Boron and Palladium + 
Silver + Boron Alloys,” Trans. Faraday Soc., 66 (1970) 727. 
3. T. B. Flanagan and Y. Sakamoto, “Hydrogen in Disordered and Ordered Palladium Alloys,” 
Platinum Metals Rev., 37 (1993) 26-37. 
4. Average loading ratios were obtained by in situ, four-point probe resistivity measurements. 
5. GDMS analyses were performed by Shiva Technologies, Inc., Cicero, NY. 
6. C. T. Dillon and B. J. Kennedy, “The Electrochemically Formed Palladium-Deuterium 
System. I. Surface Composition and Morphology,” Aust. J. Chem., 46 (1993) 663-679. 
7. D. R. Rolison, W. E. O’Grady, R. J. Doyle, Jr., and P. P. Trzaskoma, “Anomalies in the 
Surface Analysis of Deuterated Palladium,” Proceedings of the First Annual Conference on 
Cold Fusion, The National Cold Fusion Institute, Salt Lake City, UT, 272-280 (1990). 
J. J. Willems and K. H. J. Buschow, “From Permanent Magnets to Rechargeable Hydride 
Electrodes,” J. Less-Common Metals, 129 (1987) 13-30.
9. M. C. H. McKubre, S. Crouch-Baker, R. C. Rocha-Filho, S. I. Smedley, F. L. Tanzella, T. O. 
Passell and J. Santucci, “Isothermal Flow Calorimetric Investigations of the D/Pd and H/Pd 
Systems,” J. Electroanal. Chem., 368 (1994) 55-66. 
10. Cathodes provided by M. Miles and K. Johnson. 
